Welcome to this week's module Instrumental Variables.

We're going to be starting this week just a tiny bit differently.

Rather than jumping straight into the code, we're actually going to review some of the pages from the supplemental lecture material titled Bias Correction through Instrumental Variables.

I won't be going through all of it with you, but if you would like to peruse the other pages, you are more than welcome to.

The intent here here is is really that understanding visually and mechanistically how instrumental variables works, I believe is really helpful.

And the attempt here is to give you an idea of what's really happening under the hood and then we'll move into the actual code through to get you set up for your lab.

So without further ado, let's go ahead and jump into it.

I'm going to go through again the short version.

Feel free to spend extra time in here in your your PDF, pardon me, of this document.

If you pull it from Canvas, it won't have these variables named here.

I've only done this for demonstration purposes.

To recap some of what you should have already reviewed in the lecture material or learned in the lecture material is that we we have an instrumental variable is to or we have a situation, pardon me, where we utilize an instrumental variable to solve a problem of omitted variable bias.

You might recall some of these diagrams from previous courses, pardon me, where you learn about bias itself and different types of confounding confounding variables.

Variables left out therefore being omitted variable bias that is caused or that it creates in the lecture materials, it covers a few examples in our code through we're specifically looking at an example of what is the education or the impact of years of education on wages.

In our example, it's logged wages.

We'll cross that bridge when we get there and then whenever we're talking about education or wages or it could be a multitude of different things.

As mentioned at the end of your lecture, pardon me, the there exists a variable that we are not able to measure or capture and in the case of what we're looking at in our code through that is ability, we're not able to really quantify ability in a way that we can include it in our model.

Therefore, if we look at this visually, if we could include our ability as a control variable in our model, it would look like education on wages while holding ability constant.

However, because ability is something we cannot quantify and therefore we cannot include it in our model, if we do not try to try to control for it by using an instrumental variable, our treatment effect is going to be overestimated.

And we'll see that in our code through and visually what that looks like is we can see the overlap of education and wages.

Imagine that ability doesn't exist here for a second.

If we were to try and visually identify our treatment effect and it would include everywhere the overlap exists between education and wages.

Again the red and the blue.

Again that's assuming ability didn't exist as a confounding variable.

However, our model is going to estimate a significantly larger impact than what the actual true effect is.

And so what we want to do is isolate this overlap, this effect which is the true effect of education on wages.

So the question is if we can't control for ability because we can't measure it, how are we going to be able to ascertain this section of the explanatory power of wages?

That's again where instrumental variables come into play.

An instrumental variable is a exogenous variable, meaning it's something outside of the correlation of ability and is highly correlated with our policy variable.

And what it's essentially doing is creating an opportunity for us to find the, the amount of explained variance of our policy variable.

So again we want this because this is the truth.

We want to know what this explanatory power is.

Making sure that we're not touching any of this section here where all three of our variables overlap.

So instead the way we can do this is through a two step approach.

We call it a two stage least squares.

And what that means is we're going to have two models.

Our first model is going to treat our Z, our instrumental variable.

In our case we're looking at parents education and it's going to treat that as our treatment variable in our first stage model.

And it's going to regress that on education which is our policy variable that we actually care about.

However, in our first stage it becomes our outcome variable.

So we're saying what is the impact of parents education on the child's education?

And that gives us back and delete these, that gives us all of this overlap within here.

So that tells us the amount of education that's explained by parents education.

And then what we'll do is we'll take that and scroll down.

There we go.  We take that which looks like this, we call it our X1 hat.

And that's going to give us this.

So this becomes our treatment variable that doesn't include anything touched by ability.

So we've isolated the component of education that is not correlated with our omitted variable.

In our case ability and then we can use this as, as our policy variable to ascertain the treatment effect of education on wages in our example, which again is this section here.

So I hope that helps by just starting it off by explaining really like visually what we're attempting to do and how we're attempting to do it.

I'll probably jump back and forth into this PDF as we go through our code through.

All right, jumping into the code through itself.

We want to get you prepared for the lab instructions this week.

As always, we have our typical styling to preface it.  We're going to.

First, like in several of the other modules, we're going to look at the naive method and look at how not accounting for ability produces an estimate.

Then we're going to look at the two examples of how you can run a instrumental variable.

One, we're going to look at the two stage, which is mostly what the lecture focuses on, although it is not the best approach that you should take in the real world.

And so we're going to do a two stage least squared regression using the LM function.

And then we're going to also utilize IV reg, which is really the route that you should go.

We're only going to go through both the routes here, so.

So you can see the difference and why it's really important to utilize IV reg.

So we're going to go through that.

We're going to do the ols.

I've kind of bounced around, forgive me.

We're going to run the naive model, interpret those.

We're going to discuss the instrumental variables, why we use it.

Most importantly, we're going to spend our time talking about the three criteria that we have to either demonstrate quantitatively or argue theoretically in order for our instrument to be considered valid.

And that's going to be relevance, exogeneity and exclusion restriction.

And then we're actually going to have two potential, pardon me, two potential instruments that we can use father's education and mother's education in our example.

And we'll see which one is stronger and proceed with the latter, the stronger of the two.

We'll be looking at some correlation plots in order to determine if our variables, our instrumental variables, pass the relevance test.

And then we'll argue theoretically how they pass exogeneity and exclusion restriction.

We'll go into more detail there.

And then as I mentioned, we will run the two stage using the LM function.

We'll look at the output of our first stage to test the F statistic rule.

Remember that it has to be greater than 10 if you recall that from the lecture.

And then ultimately we're going to compare those results with our IV reg results to see the difference in why it's so important to use IV reg.

And then we're going to do a final wrap up just from the data set what our takeaways are and estimate the bias and its direction.

So in this case we're looking at a classic economics question of we want to know the impact of education on wages.

In our specific example that we've already talked about, we know that ability is correlated heavily with wages, meaning that those with more ability are more likely to attain higher wages and those with more ability are likely to pursue additional education or have more years of education under their belt.

Diving into the specifics, we're going to be working with the MROZ data set that's going to be from the Wooldridge package.

As you've noticed, a lot of our data sets are coming from the Wooldridge package.

It's a great package associated with some textbooks to allow you to practice various types of econometrics.

Econometrics, excuse me, goodness, I can't talk.

Econometrics.

And also program evaluation methodologies.

So now specifically this data set is looking at 753 married women.

We will be subsetting that sample size to be just those that are in the workforce or our sample size is actually a little smaller than that.

And this is coming from some data from back in 1976.

Let's go ahead and look at our variables.

We're once again working with logged wages like we did in the fixed effects module.

So again, the interpretation of logged wages is different than looking at wages explicitly.

And the reason we do that is because wages are not a normal distribution.

They're usually heavily right skewed, where some very, very wealthy folks will usually skew the data.

So in most cases, when working with wages you will log those and that again changes our outcome to be more of a percentage interpretation, although not exact for our purposes we will be translating our coefficient is as an example, if it's a 0.10 coefficient, we would be translating that to simply be 10%.

It is not the exact translation, but for our purposes that's what we're going to be working with.

The exact formula for the correct translation is later on in the module.

And then education is represented by simply the continuous variable being number of years of schooling.

And that again is our policy variable.  Experience.

That's going to be the numbers number of years of experience under your belt.  That's work experience.

So Years worked.

The thought being, of course, as you gain more experience, your wages will tend to increase.

However, and this is a new concept most likely to each of you.

We also introduce experience squared.

Now, if you were to think of just very simply speaking, experience is not strictly linear.

So generally speaking, more experience equals higher wages, you would suspect.

But after a certain period of time, there actually becomes a diminishing return to where more years of experience doesn't turn into more income.

In fact, it's a less of a return over time.

So the way we can accommodate or account for that is we include experience, which is our positive linear value, and then we have experience squared, which is going to be the.

For every additional year, experience is reduced by X, which is our value or the coefficient we get for experience squared.

So the way we do.

Sorry, the purpose of that, again, is to just account for that diminishing return that that arc.

As time goes on, the return is reduced.

So, long story short, that's why we have both of those moving into our packages.  Wooldridge.

Because that's where our data set comes from.  Aer.

That's where our IV reg function comes from.

Stargazer for all of our plot or our tables, the plier for some wrangling and then core plot.

I don't have a comment here for it, but this allows us to produce a correlation plot that we'll look at later.

So let's go ahead and load our data.

And then within the same code block, we're going to subset that data.

As I mentioned earlier, we will be subsetting only those women that are actually in the workforce.

So there's a flag in the data set where it's in labor force.  It's binary.

So if it's one, that means they're in the labor force.

If it's zero, they are not.

So we only want to look at those that are in the labor force.

So we subset there.

And then we're going to subset only to utilize the columns that we care about for this code through which is logged wages, education, experience, experience squared.

And then father's education and mother's education.  Really important.

I can't recall if I mentioned it already, but these are our two potential instrumental variables.

We will be looking at two, picking one, and then proceeding with that little tidbit.

For your lab instructions, you're presented with four potential instrumental variables.

You have to qualify each of those against each criteria necessary to have a valid instrument, and then you'll ultimately pick one of those as you progress through your lab.

So we'll be Doing that with just two here.

Let's go ahead and run this chunk.

So after we subset for just those in the labor force, our sample size is 428, whereas the.

Pardon me, the sample size of the data set itself.

I lost it.  753.

So we have a smaller data set just looking at those in the workforce.

Let's just get an example of some of this data.

We have our logged wages, the number of years of education.

Again a continuous variable, one year.

Add one for every year of education.

The the daughters have or the women have the experience.

This being the number of years of experience in the workforce.

Again, experience squared being the squared value father's education, same as education for the woman, but based on the father and same for mother's education.

Interesting.  Looking at this, we see that the mothers had more education than the fathers.

Okay, moving forward, utilizing Stargazer reminder is always in your time operating within your rmd.

Make sure that you set your output to text before you're done though always set it to result equals as is and then HTML so you get properly knitted files.

Looking at our statistics here, we can see.

I won't spend too much time on that, but we can see some of our summary statistics.

You'll be asked, I believe, if I remember correctly, to look at some information regarding standard deviation for believe your first or second question in the lab.

So just be aware of that.

Going ahead and setting up our basic naive model.

Again, this is going to be the original model that we looked at here that doesn't pay attention to ability.

We're just looking at a couple of control variables and then our education on wages.

So in this estimate we already know because ability exists, we know that this model is biased.

So but we won't if we're, if we're ignorant to the concept of ability and an omitted variable, then we would look at this and we would think, oh cool, we know exactly what our impact of education is on wages, logged wages specifically, but we know better.

So looking at the naive model, our estimate is that education.

For every additional year of education that a woman receives, we would expect roughly a 10.7% increase in logged wages.  Pretty significant.

And again 10% because it's logged wages.

So very simplistically we're going to move the decimal over two to the right.

So 10.7% for every additional year of education for.

And that is statistically significant for experience.

Pardon me, for experience.

For every additional year of experience in the workforce, we expect about a 4.2% increase in logged Wages and then our experience squared, which is again negative here.

This accounts for the diminishing return value for experience itself.

So for every additional year of experience, we would expect roughly a 0.1% decrease in the value of each year of experience.

So as experience goes on, the return on, or the return on investment, I guess you could say diminishes.

And both of those statistically significant as well.

For those interested, this is the technical formula that you would utilize in order to truthfully and with exact precision convert a logged wages coefficient here back to the percentage, the true percentage.

So it'll be a little bit more or less, give or take, what we are using here for the simplistic version.

So moving forward, we recognize that there are, there's bias within our model based on the visual we saw.

So again, why do we know that there's bias?

Why is this coefficient overestimated?

It's because the true causal effect, or, sorry, the coefficient is combining two things.

One, it's combining the actual effect of education wages, which visually, that is combining this section here, that's the first line we looked at.

And then second, it's combining this spurious correlation caused by ability.

So again, people with more ability tend to get more education and they earn more.

So we know this is biased because it's counting both of these as an impact strictly from education, whereas truthfully we know it's not.

Okay, so that's an example there.

So it's upwardly biasing it because again, it's more of that area is being attributed to education because we haven't incorporated or controlled for ability.

So we can solve this by utilizing the instrumental variable as we've already discussed, often referred to as Z.

And that's going to allow us to capture that section of treatment that is solely related to treatment, education and, and not related to or correlated with ability.

So it allows us to better ascertain the true section here of education.

Okay, I wonder how many more times I'm going to bounce back to that.

That PDF very important.

When we're talking about a valid instrument, there are three criteria that you should already be familiar with that we must satisfy in order for it to be a valid instrument.

The first can be tested quantitatively.

We could prove this empirically and demonstrate it the other two.

So criteria two and three, both exogeneity and exclusion restriction, those cannot be tested empirically.

You have to be able to argue those by theory and rationale.

Super important.

Your labor is going to be including your omitted variable as an actual variable that you can quantify in our correlation plots.

I want you to know, even though we cannot actually in the real world test either of criteria two or three, exogeneity or exclusion restriction, and we can only actually test relevance.

In your lab, you will be able to test exogeneity.

We will be able to measure just in the lab as an example, a way to demonstrate what we're talking about here.

With exogeneity, you'll be able to do it in the lab because we're using fake made up data specifically for our omitted variable.

That is not the case in the real world.

I've rambled on long enough about that, but I just want to give you a heads up.

Some students have gotten confused about that.

Just want to make sure it's very clear.

Moving back to the three criteria, let's start with number one, relevance.

Relevance means that our instrumental variable, it has to be correlated with the policy variable, in our case, education.

So once again, visually, that's saying that our instrument has to have the overlap with our education, our treatment variable, our policy variable, whatever the heck we want to call it.

So that's criteria one.

That there has to be a strong correlation between z and x1.

Okay, that one we can test with a correlation test.

When we're talking about exogeneity, exogeneity refers to the.

The rule that or the requirement.  Excuse me.

That our instrument cannot in any way, shape or form be correlated with our omitted variable.

So our instrument here cannot overlap with our omitted variable.

Now for a second here, visually speaking, why would that, why would that, why would that not work?

I was trying to think of a better way to say that.

But why would that not work?

Let's think.  If our instrument was correlated with our treatment variable, so it satisfied our first criterion.

So we had a strong correlation between z and x1.

However, there was also a correlation that between Z and X2 in this case, our omitted variable.

We would have a section here that when we ran our first stage, we would be left with this section.

And then when we were at our second stage, we would be left with this section.

That would defeat the purpose of trying to ascertain what is the true impact of education, which is here, because that's going to actually give us this spurious association with ability.

So visually speaking, it's super important that it is required.  Excuse me.

Well, it's super important that we understand why it can't be correlated with our omitted variable.

But it is a requirement that it cannot be correlated with our omitted variable.

Now, the tricky thing is we cannot Demonstrate this with a correlation.

Because we can't measurability, we can't measure our omitted variable and so we have nothing to compare it against.

If we did have that data on ability, then we would be able to easily include that in our model and it wouldn't be an omitted variable.  But it is.

So for criterion two, exogeneity, we cannot test it.

We have to be able to argue it through theory and logic.

So it's not something that we can.

It's different in your lab.

I'll reiterate that one final time.

But we have to demonstrate this via theory.

Okay, now the last one here is exclusion restriction.

This is saying that our instrumental variable cannot be correlated directly with our outcome variable.

Meaning that our instrumental variable couldn't look something like this.

It's a very big oval there, but demonstrates the point.

The correlation cannot be Z affects Y directly.

That would make our instrumental variable unclear.

That means that when we ran our X1 hat, it would actually produce this.

This giant overlap here.

Well, it would be this.

Technically it would look like this, something like that.  Very poor.

And so our X1 hat would contain all of this and then that would ultimately give us this section drawing too much.

It would give us this section here of explanatory power.

So ultimately it would just bias our estimate again.

So in order to reduce bias and properly ascertain the effect of our policy variable on our outcome variable, our instrumental variable must only be correlated with our outcome variable through our policy variable.

And that means visually here it has to only operate through the overlap.

Must only exist through the circle of our policy variable here.

I really hope that makes sense.

Please leave feedback or post questions in the discussion thread.  If.

If my attempt to explain this has been poor, I want to make sure it's just very clear.

So three criteria.

One, our instrumental variable has to be correlated with our policy variable.  We see that here.

Criterion two, exogeneity.

Our instrumental variable cannot be correlated with our omitted variable because again, that would completely.

That that would introduce bias.

It would be against the intent that we have to ultimately ascertain the true effect of policy variable on outcome variable.  Last criteria.

And that has to be argued theoretically as well because we can't demonstrate the correlation.

The final criterion, excuse me, is the exclusion restriction which is saying that Z must be correlated with y only through X1, our policy variable.

One final thing that I want to note when you run a.  You can.

Excuse me, run and we'll show you later that you can.

We have our outcome variable.

It's quantified we have a column for it, we have our policy variable, it's quantified, we have a column for it.

And we have our instrumental variable, it's quantified, we have a column for it.

We can run a correlation on Z and y and x 1 and y and oh, that did not work the way I wanted it to.

And also on Z and X1.

All that to say if you see, we won't in this example.

But if we do see that Z is correlated with Y in any kind of substantial manner, that doesn't necessarily mean that it is an invalid instrument.

Because we could have a correlation appear because of the correlation with Z to X1 and then to Y.

So just a heads up, if there's a correlation directly between Z and Y, it doesn't necessarily mean it's a bad instrument.

Or there could be no correlation and it doesn't mean that it's a bad instrument.

Instead, again with this, this exclusion criteria or exclusion restriction there you have to be able to argue by theory that the correlation that exists has to only be through X1.

Okay, once again, hope that makes sense.

Post your questions in the discussion board.

These are our three criteria that we have to make sure we are either convinced of or we've demonstrated in order to use the instrument or for it to be a valid instrument.  Moving on.

We have two potential instruments.

One is father's education, one is mother's education.

Both of which are continuous variables that represent the number of years of education for each parent.

So now we want to be able to argue why these are potentially valid instruments.

So criteria one again we will test, but for purposes of just demonstrating the value, we can argue that the children of more educated parents they tend to get more education themselves.

That could be through example setting my parents achieved a certain amount of education.

Therefore I might feel like I need to achieve at least that amount of education.

But there is a reason to believe that there's a correlation between my parents education and the amount of education that I receive.

Second is the exogeneity.

Once again, exogeneity is that instrumental variable is not correlated with our omitted variable.

And we can say that it's difficult to say that my parents education somehow turned out, it somehow changed or influenced my innate ability.

So we can say that just because my parents education, which they received a long time before I entered this world directly contributed to my innate ability.

So that's our argument for criteria two.

Obviously as you hear this you might be thinking like well yeah, be certain circumstances that I could argue that Might say otherwise, that maybe my innate ability, depending on how you operationalize that definition, could, could be influenced by my parents education.

Again in our example, innate ability is really just like that ability that you're born with, not necessarily your competencies, competencies you learned over time, but your ability to learn, your ability to earn money.

So it's something more innate, not necessarily a cumulative representation of your competencies.

I'm rambling there, but just to clarify, but you might have thoughts where you're like wait, I could argue an alternative hypothesis there about the, the correlation between my parents education and my ability.

Anyways, for our purposes this is where we're ending it.  Ending it.

Excuse me, on that criterion too, until we get to the actual theoretical argument.

And then finally, last exclusion restriction, my parents education should not affect my wages.

For example, my employer could care less that my dad is a doctor and I got a bachelor's degree in mathematics.

Like my employer only cares about my ability, my education, my competencies, my ability to fulfill the job.

My father's education or my mother's education should not affect my wages.

Now once again, you could argue that because of my parents higher level of education there could be an influence, perhaps nepotism, which we'll talk about potentially later.

Just as an aside, you could argue that maybe there's some nepotism, maybe because my father has a higher level of education and that introduced different opportunities for him and he was able to get in a really good spot maybe through a leadership role in his education or sorry, through his education he was able to get a leadership role which then somehow affected my ability to get a job in that company and make more money.

We can go on and on, but for our purposes here in a semi simplistic view to demonstrate instrumental variables, we're going to end it as.

Really there's not a solid argument that my parents education influences my wages.

Okay, a lot of rambling there.

Hopefully you stuck with me.

Moving into the demonstrate or sorry.

Evaluating the potential instruments here we're going to first go ahead and run a correlation on both of our potential instruments.

First we're going to look at our father's education and our education.

In this case it is the women's education of our sample.

So we'll look at both of those.

Let's check these out.

This is just going to produce the coefficient or the value.  Pardon me.

So we see that between the woman's education in the data and the father's education we can see that there is a positive correlation of 0.415 mother's education, not too far off.

0.387.

So both of which seem to be strongly correlated with our.

Excuse me, criteria one.

Is our instrumental variable strongly correlated with our policy variable in this case?

It does seem so far that that is the case.

Let's go ahead and plot these visually.

I can get this to run.

Okay, here we go.  Got that to run.

So we can see here visually both strong positive associations.

We're going to run this next one as our correlation plot and which is going to show us both the significance level and the values themselves for all of these variables in their correlation with each other.

This is a great function to utilize.

I highly recommend getting familiar with it.

Pardon me.

We are looking at first relevance.

So once again, what defines relevance?

Our first criteria is that our instrument is strongly correlated with our policy variable.

Policy variable is education.

And our instruments are father's education, mother's education.

We can see father education, our education or the woman's education in our data, highly statistically significant at the 0.4 or sorry, at the highest level.

And then our correlation value is strong and upward.

Mother's education, same thing, slightly less strong but still positive upward.

Both statistically significant.

One thing I want to call out, I mentioned before that we can have a correlation or we might not have a correlation with our instrument and our outcome variable.

You might see it, you might not.

Whether you see it or you don't doesn't necessarily mean that it is either a good or a bad instrument.

In this case, neither of our instruments are strongly or statistically significantly correlated with our outcome variable.  Logged wages.

Pardon me.

So in this case, sorry, in all cases we have to argue that through theory.

And that again is only through education, our policy variable.

But just as an example, our case doesn't show that.

But you might come across an example that does.

It doesn't mean it's an invalid instrument.

Okay, so we know through relevance, both of these paths are first criteria.

Now moving on to criteria two and three.

Because we cannot directly test either of these, we must argue them.

So let's see when we're talking about exogeneity once again that are instrument is not correlated with ability.

We can argue that again by saying that the parents level of education it was determined a long time ago like we saw earlier.

So there's really no reason to think that my parents education somehow facilitated or influenced my ability, my innate ability that I was born with.

So we, we can reasonably argue that those should not, those would not be correlated.

Now we talked about this one a little Bit more at length and there's a little bit more of some potential concerns as mentioned and highlighted here.

But when we're talking about the exclusion restriction that is stating again that Z only is correlated with Y through X1.

So parents education only affects the outcome variable because of the influence on education or my the the daughter's education.

In this example, once again parents don't care or employers don't care about your parents education.

The potential concern is there could be some connections.

Again I mentioned nepotism, various transmitting workplace skills to the children as we see here.

But generally speaking we're arguing that those would be very small relative to the direct impact of my parents education on my education and therefore on wages.

Now let's jump into our two stage least squares.

So we're going to first run both of our potential instruments, father's education and mother's education.

Using a first stage, we're going to run both of those, we're going to check the F statistic and then we're going to pick one of those and move forward into our second stage.

And then we're going to run the IV reg function model.

Okay, so first stage, once again the goal of that is that we're simply trying to extract the this section here, the first stage allows us to say what amount or what portion of education is explained by my parents education and then we can use that for our second stage in order to ascertain that true impact of education on locked wages.

So let's set up our models here we have our father's education, our instrument as our policy variable.

Then education becomes our outcome variable.

And then we keep our controls here which are experience and experience squared and then same thing from others education.

Let's run this here and see what our coefficients explain.

So both statistically significant.

Father's education has a coefficient of 0.271, highly statistically significant.

This is saying that for every additional year father's education we would expect to see the daughter has approximately three more months of education.

For every additional year of education the father has on the mother's side, it's nearly identical.

Very very similar number.

So again nearly identical.

Both saying for every additional year of education for either parent the daughter would have received about three more months worth of education.

So for every four additional years of education the daughter would have received one more year of education.

Both statistically significant.

Now let's recall the F statistic.

In order for it to not be a weak instrument we can do the F test which is saying that the F statistic has to be greater than 10 in order to be a strong instrument.

And in this case, father's education lands at 30.091 and mother's 25.470.

Both of these pass the F statistic.

Now, not to spend a bunch of time on it, we could include both.

For our purposes, we're going to keep it a little simple.

We're going to lead with just one.

For demonstration purposes, we're going to be using father's education because it has a slightly higher coefficient and a slightly higher F statistic.

So moving forward, we're going to proceed with a father's education.

Now that we've accomplished our first stage visually, once again, what we've been able to do is extract this section of education.

There it is.  So we've been able to extract this section of education.

The other variables are out of here.

But again, this is this section of education.

So our X1 hat represents this visually.

And now we want to go ahead and regress that on education.

So we're going to utilize the fitted function and we're going to fit it, sorry, use that on our first model with father, our first stage model, we're going to save that to a new column.

And actually, this right here is just visually showing you what these look like, sort of taking the mystery out of what education or the, sorry, your X1 hat would look like.

It's literally just the predicted values of our first model.

So we're saying that based on the father's education and the control variables we introduced, we would expect that the daughter's education, which is actually 12, but for this particular person, we would have expected, based on those variables and our estimate that the daughter would have received approximately 12.21 years of education.

So the model, and there's some variability between each of these, but generally speaking, if a father receives about seven years of education, we would approximate, or our model is approximating that each of these people would have received about, give or take 12 years of education.

One interesting one though, is that for this daughter, she received 14 years of education.

The father received 14 years of education, putting her at an estimate of about 13.95.

Recall that our estimate, it was about every.

For every four years of education.

For every additional.

Pardon me, is a very important point.

For every additional year of education, the.

For every additional four years of education that the father receives, we would expect the daughter gets approximately one more year of education.

So in this case, this father received about seven years more education than these fathers, or they did receive seven more years so if we were to just simply say seven times, we'll just make it round, I think it was 0.27.

We would expect that a father who received 14 years of education would have a daughter who received about 1.89 years more education than a father who received seven years of education and their daughter thereby we would have expected about 12 years.

So anyways, let's add the this to 12, which is sort of the baseline we're seeing here puts us at about 13.89.

So we can see here that our model is taking that information along with experience coefficient and experience squared coefficient and it puts us right in the ballpark of 13.95, 13.89.

So these are just our predicted values and that's how the coefficient would then therefore fit into our model.

Hopefully that sheds a little light on it and kind of takes the mystery out of what is this, this X1 hat or this education hat.

So now moving forward to this, this formula here, I just put it together for you simply for the purpose of explaining via a formula view what the we've attempted to do with this, with this X1 hat.

We're saying that actual education is made up of, we're calling it two items, your family background component, that is this impact caused by your parents education, in this case father's education.

And then we have ability.

So we're saying that we're stripping away, using this X1 hat, we're stripping away the section of our policy variable education.

We're stripping away this section, we're completely cutting this out because we're only extracting from treatment education here, this section here which has nothing to do with ability.

So long story short, that's what that's demonstrating there and that's what our X1 hat has done.

Now we need to utilize that X1 hat in place of our treatment variable.

Coming back to this probably for the last time.

Now we have our X1 hat.

Ability is not accounted for in here, so we can't account for it.

Now we have logged wages.

So now we regress the X1 hat on our instrumental variable, therefore giving us a more approximate estimate, a non biased approximate estimate of treatment education in our case on out or on wages, excuse me, logged wages to be exact.

So let's go ahead and run our second stage again.

Education hat becomes our policy variable.

Keep our controls the same and we run it on original outcome variable we're looking at and voila.

We have a few really important things we want to call out here.

First of all is our coefficient Our coefficient is now 0.07, which would be translated since it's logged wages down to about 7%.

Let's circle back to what we had previously calculated with our naive model, which was 10.7% and it was highly statistically significant, very confident, and it was a very high coefficient.

So for every year of education, additional year of education a daughter receives, we would expect their wages, their logged hourly wages to go up by about 10.7%.

Compare that to our non biased example, which shows us that we would actually only expect a 7% increase in logged hourly wages for every additional year of education the daughter receives.

Big difference there.

Experience and experience squared were largely the same.

Oh, and one other very important point.

We can see here that the significance level is only at the 0.1 level.

And this is going to tie us into why we need to jump to the IV reg model.

But this is actually in totality stating that this is not statistically significant at a level that we would consider.

So therefore, in this model it's estimating that when we control for the bias, when we eliminate that section of bias, ability bias, that education actually does not have a statistically significant impact on logged hourly wages, which is huge.

We went from highly statistically significant, huge impact to a not statistically significant impact and a lower estimate in general.

Now this ties us into why we need to utilize IV reg.

Using the two stage model is great because it allows us to demonstrate what's happening under the hood in a more clear way.

But now that you understand what each of those stages is doing, it's important for us to actually utilize in a professional setting IV reg, which is specifically built for instrumental variables and the way it performs the underlying calculations is far more accurate.

So typically what you would see is that a two stage using the LM function is going to over estimate or have overconfidence in your significance level.

So kind of like with autocorrelation, which we've looked at in the instrumental variables and in our sorry, interrupted time series and in our fixed effect model, where if you have longitudinal data, autocorrelation is a thing.

So we need to calculate robust standard errors most of the time when you calculate robust standard errors and your robust standard errors will be less significant or have a lower significance than your original estimate.

Because robust standard errors kind of trues up the actual standard errors compared to the overly confident estimate that is caused by autocorrelation and just how the model works.

All of that to say most of the time.

If you were to use a two stage least Squared, your significance would be overestimated.

It would be overconfident.

In our case, using this data set, there's actually, it's the reverse so it can go in both directions, but it is biased still in a different direction.

In this case it's saying that our standard errors are actually too large where most the time.

Again, can't emphasize this enough.

Most of the time it's overconfident and our standard errors would be too small from a two stage least squared method using the LM function.

So it would usually lead to like a false positive.

So it'd be overly confident.

We would have an additional, additional asterisk, not necessarily an additional one, but it would be more, it would most likely be more significant in our situation.

It's mathematically incorrect, the standard errors it's producing just by a little bit, which we'll see shortly, but enough to where it's producing a standard errors that are too large and therefore giving us a insignificant value.

All of this to say the manual two stage approach should not be your go to.

It is going to produce potentially improper values or mathematically incorrect standard errors that would give you improper estimates.

So we, we really, as it states here, we cannot safely use this manual approach when it comes to hypothesis testing.

It's great for pedagogical purposes, but not for actually using it in the real world.

Leading into this.

Finally, forgive me for getting on the soapbox there using IV Reg and there's a few other variations of the instrumental variable functions you can use, but IV REG is the one that we've demonstrated or introduced in the lecture and where we're using for our purposes here.

So IV REG is a single function specifically built for this, where it actually calculates the two stages in the back end and it gives you a more precise estimate of correct standard errors.

So we're going to utilize that.

It's very similar to a typical LM function, nothing very complicated.

You're going to have your outcome variable, your tilde, your policy variable, your control variables.

The introduction of this bar though is where it changes things.

So you have the model that we want to measure.

We have sort of our naive model that we want to look at here.

And then we have our model that or, sorry, on the other side of the bar, pardon me, we have our instrumental variable along with the same controls that we want.

In our normal model we have to include controls on both sides so the model knows explicitly what our controls are.

So the change is on the right side.

We simply include the instrument that we want, which Will sub out for our policy variable here in the back end.

And then we keep, pardon, I did the wrong instrumental variable here swaps out with the policy variable here and then our experience and experience squared, our control variables remain the same.

So we save that to our IV model and we're going to go ahead and run it.

Output it using Stargazer.

And we can see here, just like when we calculate robust standard errors, our coefficient remains the same.

When we controlled for autocorrelation or adjusted for autocorrelation, our coefficient remained the same.  What changed?

Our standard errors and therefore our significance level.

Look at this difference.

The 0.034 is our standard error.

Here it's 0.036.

We are not statistically significant at the 0.05 level on this one.

But by just simply running the IV reg, having a slightly more accurate output with our robust or, sorry, with our standard errors using IV reg, we actually cross the threshold where we are statistically significant at the 0.05 level.

Meaning that education does have an impact on logged hourly wages to the tune of 7%.

For every additional year of education that a daughter receives or the woman receives here in this data set, we would expect to see a 7% increase in their logged hourly wages.

Our experience squared and experience coefficients remain identical.

We don't see a change there.  That's great.

So we can say confidently now that using our instrumental variable, being able to isolate the true impact of education on log wages and using the IV reg as opposed to the two stage, we can confidently say that there is a statistically significant impact of education on logged wages.

And then this here is just breaking down again the left and right syntax for that IV reg model.

So now let's go ahead and look at all of these side by side.

We're going to look at our naive model, which is what we originally put together, and our instrumental variable model using IV reg, we had a 10.7% increase or impact on every year of education on log wages.

In our biased model that was attributing the effect of ability on on education, or pardon me, on education and logged wages being absorbed into our education coefficient, whereas when we control for that we go down to 7%.

So if we wanted to look at the proportion difference here, go from the 10.75% to the 7.02%, we're looking at a difference of 35%.

So we're saying that the naive model was overestimating the effect of education to the tune of 35%.

So this is essentially our ability Bias.

This is how much of ability is accounting is impacting logged wages.

So when we are talking about the direction of bias, we can really know that by the correlation.

If it's a positive correlation between our instrumental variable, pardon me, not instrumental variable, our ability, goodness, pullback, rewind, our omitted variable, excuse me, and our treatment variable.

If that's a positive correlation, we can ascertain that that's going to have a positive bias on our estimate.

And then same with ability omitted variable and our outcome variable.

That's a positive correlation because those with more ability make more money.

Those with more ability get more education.

Positive.  So we can.

We can ascertain that our estimate will be will positively overestimate our actual treatment effect.

So to summarize, just to wrap it all up here, we utilized an instrumental variable because we knew that bias existed in a variable that we could not include in our model, that being ability.

In order to demonstrate to extract the true impact of education, we introduced an instrumental variable that met all of our criteria and it allowed us to extract the true effect of treatment on education.

We met all of the criteria.

You'll have to do that in your lab.

And then we were able to review the impact of that bias in our naive model as opposed to our IV reg model.

That is it for our code through.

I'm going to give you just a quick little overview of your lab, some things you'll have to do and then you're off to the races with your lab in the lab itself.

I think I told you earlier, I will only mention it one time.  One more time.

But I'm going to do it one more time.

Your lab will have your omitted variable as a field.

Therefore you will be able to check the correlation which you cannot do in the real world.

And but you will be able to do that.

You will be able to test criteria two in your lab, whereas in the real world you will not be able to important to differentiate that.

So that's the big thing you want to be aware of.

Other than that, I think it's actually pretty straightforward.

As always, if you have any questions, reach out in the discussion thread or contact me directly via email.

Thank you very much for your time on this.

Please leave notes or shoot me messages on your thoughts on how helpful these code throughs are.

And if nothing else, I will see you in the discussion boards.  Take care.

