Welcome to week two. This will be our 2nd module and second go through, going through a difference in differences. Again, as always, you should have gone through the lecture material, um, so you're ready to go through this code through. And, uh, by the end of this, you'll be set up to complete your lab. Uh, we're gonna reiterate some of what you learned in the lecture material, talking about what exactly the difference in differences is, how we utilize it, importantly, some, uh, key assumptions in order for the, the methodology to be valid. We will go ahead and construct our difference in difference model, go through and interpret the coefficients, um, Go, uh, uh, visualize the difference in difference design based on the data set we're using. That way you can see again, uh, more clearly the secular trend, the parallel trend assumption as we've discussed in the lecture. Um, and as we'll go through some more here, we'll go ahead and construct our counterfactual, and then we will spend some time at the end of this code through comparing what you learned last week with interrupted time series, uh, against what you Learned this week with the difference in difference approach. That will be really important for your lab where you're going to have to um utilize both of those and then discuss the difference between what a beta 2 coefficient represents in each model. Uh, I don't remember if it's exactly beta 2, but either way, you'll have to be able to recognize the difference between both of those, uh, sorry, both of those models coefficients and explain the difference between them. Um, and so forth. So, we'll spend some time going over that. So to recalibrate, the difference in difference is going to be a, a way for us to utilize a reference group. Uh, we're just calling it a control group, uh, against our treatment group. So we have two groups, and we have pre and post-period data, pre and post-treatment period data. And we can utilize, um, well, let me pull back. Like how we utilized the uh treatment group in our interrupted time series um module, the treatment group's pre-intervention trend is what we used to calculate our counterfactual. So we assumed that the trend in the pre-intervention period would have, uh, maintained the same slope in the post-intervention period, and thereby we could infer what our treatment effect would be. Now, in the case of uh uh having two groups, instead of using the treatment group's pre-intervention slope, now we're going to use a reference group, our control group's slope in order to compare the difference of our treatment group. And therefore, we can infer what the uh treatment effect is based on our comparison group's slope. So to get to the heart of the difference in difference, it really is that. It is a difference between our treatment group, pre and post-period. And the difference of our control group pre and post period and the difference between those values. That's the math that's taking place under the hood that gets us to our difference in difference. Now the statistical model is going to be set up utilizing the same LM function that we've used before. So we'll have our outcome variable, which in the case of our data set this week, we're working with the Wooldridge package, and it's called the injury data set. It's looking at a Uh, implementation of an increase in workers' compensation benefits in the state of Kentucky. And our, that's our treatment group. Our outcome variable is the number of weeks people stay on workers' compensation. Uh, and our comparison group is going to be Michigan, which had the, uh, which did not, excuse me, have an increase in their benefits. So the, uh, Michigan is our reference group, our control group. Kentucky is our treatment group. Our outcome variable is the number of weeks spent on workers' compensation, and we want to know if increasing the benefit increased the number of weeks people stayed on the benefit. So our outcome variable in our code this week, we'll be looking at the number of weeks. Beta zero is going to be our constant in the case of the difference in difference module, uh, model, excuse me. Remember that that is our baseline control group value of the pre-intervention period. Beta 1, this is our treatment, or sorry, our, our group flag. It is our treatment flag, pardon me, that tells us 1, it's the treatment group, or 0, it is the control group. And then we have, and that represents the average difference between our control and treatment group in the pre-intervention period. Now, beta 2 is going to be our post flag. That is 1, if we're in the post-treatment period, and 0 if we're in the pre-treatment period. This tells us the secular trend. This tells us the uh um The slope that our control group had between pre and post-intervention, otherwise known as the secular trend. And then this is new. We have an interaction term, and this is going to be our group flag times our post flag, meaning that in the post-intervention period for our treatment group, this flag will be on, otherwise, it will be off. And this is what represents our difference in difference. This is our treatment effect that we're looking for. Now, the key assumptions, this is extremely important for difference in difference to be valid, is we have, we're, we're basing our assumption, our counterfactual, off of the assumption that our groups would have had parallel trends, parallel slopes, um, had intervention never occurred. Now, separately, one that's not talked about within the lecture material is the concept of no spillover effects. And this is pretty straightforward, uh, like in the first module, Interrupted time series, we had the example in our lab that the, uh, frequency of the bus schedule. Um, or sorry, we increased the frequency of buses, and we wanted to know if that increased bus ridership. Long story short, we talked about if another event happened at the same time, perhaps a marketing event by the bus company or the local county in order to get more bus ridership. If that happened at the same time as the Schedule, then it's difficult for us to ascertain which caused what. Uh, so if there is an increase in bus ridership, it's difficult for us to say, was that caused by the schedule change or was it caused by the marketing event, um, or the marketing effort. Uh, with that being said, the no spillover concept is simply saying that, um, the treatment group would have the effect of the treatment itself would have no way spilled over to the control group or saying that there's not another event that would have occurred at the same time that would have affected the control group or the treatment group simultaneously, or again that there's bleed over meaning that people in the group could have somehow accessed the treatment uh in the uh treatment group. Not to spend too much time on this, but to, like, uh, for those of you familiar, Kansas City is shared by uh both Kansas and Missouri. Let's say hypothetically that we would have had Um, an increase in minimum wage in Kansas City, Missouri, not Kansas City, Kansas, and we wanted to assess the effects of the, uh, increase in minimum wage. So again, Kansas City, Missouri had an increase in minimum wage, Kansas City, Kansas did not. The incentive would have been if people lived in Kansas City, Kansas to get jobs in Kansas City, Missouri, because they might have made more money. So travel across the state line, they're not necessarily, there's a blurred line there, um, but there could have been a bleed over or a spillover. where people from Missouri, uh, excuse me, Kansas would have gone and gotten jobs in uh Missouri where there was an increase in minimum wage, uh, and that would be a spillover effect. So, long story short, just as a few examples, hopefully not to confuse you. Uh, in, in that example, a researcher might have actually filtered out that city because there's spillover effects. Uh, in our case, we're working with different states that are, you know, a state apart, um, and, uh, uh, we don't have to worry so much about that, but that is another key assumption. The main one being the parallel trend assumption. We spent too much time on that. It's not gonna be super pertinent for you, but important concept to be aware of. Uh, I've already mentioned the code we're gonna, or sorry, the data set we'll be using is the injury data set, and that's from the Wooldridge package, great package, great resource to dig into with different data sets and testing different types of methodologies. Um, to recap some of the context, so we're looking at the state of Kentucky as your treatment group. Uh, they increased their workers' compensation benefits, uh, and the, we're going to be using Michigan as a comparison group, which did not change those benefits, and we simply want to know, did increasing the benefits in the state of Kentucky, lead to people staying on workers' compensation benefits longer? You think you make more money. So you stay on it longer. As opposed to making less money, you're more incentivized to get off of it quicker. Um, and so you might call that a moral hazard, where again, you just wanna stay on it longer because the benefits are better. So the question we're asking is, did increasing the benefit lead to longer injury durations, meaning stay on workers' compensation benefits longer. The hypothesis is that higher workers' compensation benefits, making more money. We'll increase the duration um that you stay on those benefits. So we'll be working with a couple of, uh, uh, basic details here. Treatment group is Kentucky. They're the state that increased the benefit. The control group is Michigan. They did not change their benefits. So we're looking at a time period from, uh, before 1980 is our pre-intervention period. And after 1980 is post-treatment period. That's uh in 1980 is when the, um, the change in benefit uh happened. And then the outcome variable is simply the number of weeks people stayed on workers' compensation. Uh, we'll be using a few different packages. Um, we're gonna use Knit R, but we will not be using that, so you can disregard. We'll be using the Wooldridge package uh to load the data set, Stargazer to have our regression tables, and this week, we will be using the plier. Uh, most other modules we don't. Try to stick with base R. Uh, but in this particular module, we do, uh, just for the grouping functionality of the plier. So let's go ahead and load in our data. We just do that with data, and then injury is the name of our data set, and then we're gonna check the structure of that data too. And here we go. We have quite a bit of columns in this data set. We will not be using the vast majority of these, but we'll go through the ones we will be using. Uh, structure, by the way, is a, uh, STR. It's a great way to get an idea, uh, an overview of the data set you're working with. Uh, it tells you the column name, the data type, also some of the, the values, the first few rows, um, uh, of each column, so you can get a feel for what your data set is made up of, the structure of it. Uh, so, looking at this, we are going to be using duration. This is our outcome variable. This is a number representing the number of weeks a person stayed on the workers' compensation benefit. Uh, after change, the AF change, uh, abbreviated here. This is our, um, post flag. This is telling us the pre-intervention period versus the post-intervention period. So once again, pre-intervention is the time periods before 1980. Post-intervention is anytime after 1980. So we're gonna rename this um for clarity, but this is going to be our treatment or our post flag. Um, high earner, this is going to be a control variable that we introduced towards the end of the uh module. Um, and this is just saying whether or not they were considered a high earning individual, and we're gonna see if those who made more um higher, uh, a higher tier of workers' compensation, um, were more likely to stay on the benefit. Uh, so we'll circle back toward, to that towards the end here. And then, let's see, uh, this one, Kentucky. This is going to be our group flag. So Kentucky is already set to where it's 1. If it's Kentucky, it's 0 otherwise. So it is our treatment flag. We're going to rename it though for again, clarity. And We'll be working with. There are plenty of others that we could have incorporated as control variables or even different types of analyses we could have done, um, but for our purposes and this code through, uh, we're just using those. So, let's go ahead and subset those columns and just get an idea of those values. So once again, duration represents the number of weeks somebody stayed on the benefit. The shortest amount of time looks to be just a, a quarter of a week. So we're looking at 2 days-ish. Um. And then we have, uh, the quantile here, the median here, the average here with the average being significantly more than the median, saying that we have some, uh, um, individuals who were really weighted towards the top, uh, the max here. So that's pulling up our average, but our median is staying about 4. So, long story short, we have some people that are really dragging up that, um, or weighting that average higher. We have the pre and post period, uh. Yeah, sorry, forgive me, I blinked for a second. This is our pre and post period. So after change, it's 1. So after 1980, it's 1, pre-1980 is 0. so we can see here, we just have the binary flag 0 and 1. I earners also 0 and 1. And then we have our 0 and 1 flag representing our treatment group. So Kentucky is 10 for any other state. Looking at the data once again, uh, this is reiterating it. So the number of weeks is the, uh, uh, underlying metric we have for duration. Kentucky is the treatment flag. We're gonna rename that for our group variable. After change is our post flag, we're gonna also rename that. And then this is a control variable we're gonna add later on, uh, whether or not somebody was a high earner, meaning that they, meaning a higher amount of workers' compensation. So let's go ahead and rename some of these and then build out our model. So we're gonna rename the Kentucky variable or column, excuse me, to just group. So once again, 1 for treatment group because that's already how this is labeled, and 0 otherwise. And then we're gonna do the after change to become our post. So once again, it's already labeled, um, or it's already containing the same data we want. We're just changing the name of the column. So instead of after change, it will be post. So one is representing the post period. Uh, post-intervention period, 0 is representing the pre-intervention period. And then we're gonna go ahead and create our interaction term, which is simply, uh, our group variable times our post variable. And then let's go ahead and stack those together here. And we can see that we have our group flag, and then our uh free and post flag, and our interaction term. So one times one equals one, therefore our interaction term is on. And 0 times 1 or 0 times 0 is 0. Therefore, interaction term is off. Now, we'll be using the pliers. So now we're gonna go ahead and um run through. So from our dataset injury. We're going to group on two columns. First is the group column. So we're gonna say we have a Kentucky, uh, uh, or we have our Kentucky group, our treatment group. And then we have our Michigan group, the control group. So we're gonna group on that first, leading us to have two groups. And then we're also going to group on the period, so the post period, so pre and post. That's gonna give us 4 distinct groups. For our treatment group, we're gonna have a pre and post period. For our control group, we're gonna have a pre and post period. And then we're gonna pipe that and have um uh summarize, create a number of observations column. That's what the N equals in, that's the number of observations, the number of rows. And then we're gonna create two new columns here. So group label is simply going to be a more clean label for our output, and that's gonna say if it is group equals one, so treatment is on, uh, that's Kentucky, otherwise, Michigan. And then the period, again, just another way to make it a clean output, we're saying if it's uh post-treatment period, then post 1980, otherwise, pre-1980, which is again, our flag is off, therefore, it's pre-1980, and let's go ahead and pull those values out. So Michigan in the pre-intervention period had 828 observations. Michigan in the post-treatment period had 696 observations. Kentucky in the pre-intervention period had 2,938 observations, and in the post-period, 2,688 observations. Now, we're gonna go and look at the actual averages. So we're gonna do similar. We're gonna take our data set. We're gonna save it to a new object. We're just calling group means. We're gonna group by group and post. We're gonna calculate the mean duration. So once again, this is the average number of weeks uh people stayed on workers' compensation benefits. We're gonna calculate the number of observations once again, and then do the same thing with our um column labels. So now with our actual number of weeks, we have our Michigan control group in the pre-period, having an average number of duration of weeks on workers' compensation, about 12 weeks. In the post-period, about 15.5 weeks, so they grew. That would again be our secular trend, the change between these two values. And then we have our treatment group in the pre-intervention period, 8.33 weeks, and that grew slightly after the intervention to 9.5 weeks. So this, we're going to take and do a manual difference in difference approach. And what you'll find is that the, uh, the calculation where you find the average of the treatment group in the post-period and the uh pre-period, subtract that, do the same for the control group, and then subtract those two values. Um, that will give you the same value that we calculate when we run a difference in difference model. But of course, without the significance level, without the standard errors. But this is simply to show you that the, uh, formula we looked that up here is literally what the model is going to be doing in terms of those coefficients. Oops, did I overshoot? Here we go. So first, we're going to pull our group means, which we had already calculated up here and saved to an object. We're going to filter to just when the group is zero, so this is Michigan, so our control group, and in the pre-intervention period because our post flag is off, and we're going to pull the average from that. And then we're going to do the same thing for the Michigan group, the control group in the post-intervention period, and then we're going to do the same for our treatment group. So we have our Kentucky group pre-intervention. And then our Kentucky group post-intervention, pull all of those averages, and then we're gonna simply uh subtract from the treatment post period, the treatment-free period, and then the same for control. And then the difference in difference is going to be the difference in the in the treatment group minus the difference in the control group. And then we're gonna run some concatenation, and we're gonna print that out to look a little nice. So we have the 12.06 we previously calculated in the pre-intervention for Michigan, the control group, and then the difference between the two is 3.41 weeks. And then we do the same thing for Kentucky, gets us to a difference of 1.24. So 1.24, the difference in the treatment group minus the difference in the control group, gives us an effect size of -2.17 weeks, suggesting That, uh, the intervention, the increase in workers' compensation benefits actually reduced the duration of people utilizing or receiving those benefits. So now, let's actually structure our model and look at that. So we have the LM function. Our outcome variable is duration, the number of weeks spent on workers' compensation benefits, our group flag, our post flag, and then our interaction term, and then we're pulling from the injury data set. And recall that we're using type equals text because we're working in RMD. When you're working, uh, or when you're ready to knit your file, you have to make sure you use type equals HTML and make sure your results are set to as is. I've set up your templates for the labs to have this and all of the um necessary sections. So just be cognizant of that still that you need to do type equals HTML. And then last, if you choose to use intercept.bottom equals false, this moves your constant, your intercept from the bottom, which is the natural default, to the top. If you choose to use that and also use covariant. labels, you have to make sure that you include a a value for your constant. Um, up here. Uh, otherwise, you don't have to because it'll just default, but a good rule of thumb is to make sure that you were, uh, assigning a label to all of your, um, uh, variables and to make sure you're cognizant of the order of those. If not, you will have a mislabeling issue and that will, uh, cause you to interpret your results incorrectly. Uh, this right here, just a heads up. Some of you may come across this. Um, this is a weird little feature with Stargazer. If you clear your output or your objects, and then you rerun this, you should not have this warning. Um, so don't get scared if you see that warning. Usually, it's just because you have other things loaded. Um, I had previously gone through and built this code through. And I had run this, so I had previously had a, a difference in difference model built, and that's usually why the warning pops up. All that to say, nothing for us to worry about here. Let's go ahead and look at our values. So first, we have our control group, our constant. We labeled this to be more specific to the interpretation, but this is our constant beta zero. But the beta zero in a difference in difference model represents the average of the control group in the pre-intervention period. Control group 3 as it's labeled here. And we can compare that against our average that we calculated. The control group in the pre-treatment period is 12.06. That aligns perfectly. It's uh significantly, excuse me, statistically significant, uh, because it is different from zero. That's important to note. Then we have our beta one. This represents the difference between the control group and the treatment group in the pre-intervention period. This suggests, otherwise known as a delta, uh, for those that don't know, a delta is simply the difference. So the difference between our treatment group and, sorry, our treatment group and control group is the treatment group. Uh, pre-treatment average is approximately 3.73 less than our control group. So we would say 12.06 minus 3.73 puts us at about 8 and change. And what do you know, our pre-treatment average for the for the treatment group is 8.33 weeks. So that tracks. And then we have our beta 2. This is our secular trend. This is the difference between the control group's pre-intervention average and the post-intervention average. This is our control group slope, again, otherwise known as the secular trend. This is saying that from the pre-intervention period to the post-intervention period, The number of weeks people stayed on workers' compensation benefits in Michigan, our control group, grew by 3.41 weeks. And then finally we have our beta 3. This is our difference in difference estimator. This is the difference between the treatment and the control group in the post-intervention period, uh, assuming that the the treatment group would have maintained the same secular trend as the control group. This is, in other words, our treatment effect estimate. Importantly here, we can see that it's negative, indicating that the, uh, if this were to have been statistically significant, which it is not. It would have indicated that our treatment. Increasing, recall that the treatment is increasing the workers' compensation benefit amount, that, that, uh, intervention. Decreased the number of weeks people stayed on workers' compensation, although not statistically significant. If it were, that's what that would have meant. So based on our model and the difference in difference approach, assuming that the underlying states had a friends. The effect of increasing the amount of workers' compensation payment did not do anything to affect the number of weeks people stayed on that benefit. If you wanted to pause and review this for your um interpretation in the lab. OK. And now, moving on. One important instructor note I wanna put out there is, uh, as you should have noted in the lab, or excuse me, in the lecture. We do not have to have identical groups in the pre-treatment period for valid inference. So we do not have to have um uh the same types of groups. We do not have to say that they are similar enough. They can be distinctly different, except they do have to meet the parallel trans assumption for our inference to be true. So important to note that. Now, let's go ahead and clean up our output. We're gonna extract all of our coefficients. So from the difference in difference model, we're extracting the coefficients, subsetting to be the first. That is our constant, that's our pre-intervention control group average. We do the same thing with our group flag, post flag, and then our, our interaction term. Extract those, plug those into um uh some, uh, uh, uh, excuse me, a table to have a nice clean output here. So the way that we do and described those coefficients, uh, we're just putting this in a nice tabular format for you. The, the hypothesis being if our um beta0, are constant, again, the pre-treatment control group average, if it's different from 0, it's statistically significant. Uh, for beta 1, that's the difference between our pre uh uh our pre, excuse me, the difference between our control group and our treatment group in the pre-intervention period. If that's statistically significant, then that's saying that our groups did differ, and in our case, they were statistically significant. Or beta 2 is asking, did control group change over time? Was it a statistically significant change in the control group from the pre to post-intervention period? In our model, it was, so it was a statistically significant different change. And then last, did treatment have an effect? This is our beta 3, our difference in difference estimator, and according to our model, the difference in difference estimator did not have an effect. Now, importantly, if you were to go and look up this data set, uh, look up the original paper, um, how we built our model is simplistic and it doesn't account for certain things that the original did. Um, so there are different variations of different models that you could utilize to actually show a, a, a, a, uh, Statistically significant effect. Uh, and you can do that on your own, spend some time tackling it. Uh, it's specifically looking at high earners within the state. Um, so, long story short, there's something you can do to play around with that and have a meaningful effect. In the case of our simplistic approach here, it does not have a meaningful effect. Now you'll have to recall this for your lab, but you can reconstruct from your model coefficients the averages for each group. We know that our beta zero in and of itself represents the average of the control group in the pre-intervention period. The way that we can calculate our post-intervention value for our control group, not the change, but the actual average in the post-intervention period. is we simply add our pre-intervention value, beta 0, to our beta 2, which is our post-intervention difference. So remember the delta, so we just add the delta. Uh, and then the same thing for the treatment effect, or so the treatment group, excuse me, except the beta 0. In order to get the pre-intervention, Value for the treatment group, you have to take the baseline value of the control group and then add a beta 1, which is again the delta between the pre-intervention group or the pre-intervention period for control group and the pre-intervention period for the treatment group. Boy, saying those words can get a little, uh, a little lengthy. Uh, forgive me if I say it incorrectly at some point throughout this. And then in order to construct our post-intervention, uh, Post-intervention period value for the treatment group, we simply add all of our um uh coefficients together. And then let's go ahead and output a table, just demonstrating all of that once again. So we have our different groups, different periods, and then how we can calculate the actual value is by, and this is extracting, by the way, the means we calculated previously and then comparing them to our new calculation, just to demonstrate that it's the exact same. So for the treatment group post-period, we have to add all the coefficients together. Treatment group pre-period, you add beta 1 and beta 0. The control group in the post-intervention period is beta 0 plus beta 2, and then beta 0 in and of itself is our control group in the pre-intervention period. So now let's go ahead and visualize our model here. Also going to be showing our counterfactual. And so in order to calculate the counterfactual, beta 1 and beta 2, so we would leave off our difference in difference estimator, and that would show us based on the secular trend of the control group, what the Expected outcome would have been had treatment not occurred are counterfactual um for our treatment group. So, let's go through this. We have Michigan, our control group. Their initial starting period was 12.1. That's 12.1-ish weeks. Uh, that's the, um, Claimants, the workers' compensation beneficiaries, stayed on their benefits, so 12 weeks in the pre-intervention period, up to 15.5 weeks in the post-intervention period, and that slope is what our secular trend represents, and that's what we would assume, based on parallel trends assumption, our treatment group would have followed. So assuming that holds true, our yellow dashed line here represents that. And so in our pre-intervention period for the treatment group, we're at 8.3 weeks. Had they followed the parallel trend, we would have been at about 11.7 weeks. However, we're inferring because of treatment, although not statistically significant, so our treatment technically had no effect in our model. But the 2.2 weeks we're calculating is representing the difference between um what the counterfactual would have shown and what our data actually calculated. Again, the counterfactual, how do we calculate that? We simply leave off our difference in difference estimator, and then that gives us the value of the pre-intervention period of the control group, less the difference in the treatment group at the pre-intervention period, less the secular trend, and that tells us where we believe our treatment group would have otherwise ended up. So although we just did that in our graph, let's just show us, uh, go through again how we calculate that. We have our control group mean. Pre-intervention, 12.06. The difference between the control group and the treatment group in the pre-intervention period was 3.73, -3.73. And then the time trend, so the secular trend, the difference in the control group pre and post period, was 3.41. Add all this together and it puts us at 11.74 weeks. That is our counterfactual that we're comparing against to get our difference in difference estimator. Actual outcome once again, and then we find the difference between the two. So 11.74 is our uh uh counterfactual, 9.57 is our actual, leaving us with a negative 2.17 weeks, which is equal to our difference in difference estimator. I had to pause for a moment. My, uh, our output was freezing up here. I wasn't wanting to load the code chunk. Um, now we're back in action. So, uh, just to reiterate, counterfactual, put us at 11.74 weeks. Actual outcome was 9.57, getting us to our difference in difference estimator of 2.17. Although once again, just to reiterate, that is not statistically significant based on our model, but that is how our, or, excuse me, how the model calculates that effect. So now, uh, a note on the parallel trends. I mentioned at the top, the, and a few times throughout the parallel trends is the vital assumption that tells us, uh, if intervention had not occurred, our treatment group and control group would have maintained the same slope. And that is critical because if we call back to this, um, that is how we utilize, we utilize the control group's slope in order to determine our counterfactual, which we then Used to determine our treatment effect. So if our counterfactual was actually having an entirely different slope, then that throws off our assessment of our treatment effect. And so a vital assumption for the difference in difference model is that they have to, or we have reason to believe they would have maintained the same slope. So now when we're talking about testing it though, the challenge is that there is no, forgive me, I'm trying to find where exactly I ended off at. Um, there is no way for us to test. If that assumption has been violated, because like the counterfactual, um, we can try and ascertain what would have happened otherwise, but we don't know what would have happened, meaning we don't know if the control group would have had something else happen and caused the slope to change, and therefore our treatment group would have been on a totally different path. Um, we just, we don't know what we don't know, and we don't know what would have otherwise happened, and we can't tell what would have otherwise happened. So long story short, we do not have a way to um do a hard test as to whether the uh parallel trend assumption holds true. Um, there are some things you could do if you had panel data, um, although that kind of puts us in a more complicated discussion where you could plot the pre-intervention period and you can see if the treatment and the control group were, um, Having parallel trends at that time. But at that point, you would move more into a fixed effect model, which we'll go into next week. Um, long story short, there's not a way for us to test it. Uh, but we can, um, argue it and discuss whether or not we have reason to believe otherwise, that, that they would have had different trends, uh, and so forth. So, uh, not testable, but we can talk about what, uh, what reasons we have to believe they would have, uh, maintained the same slopes. All right. Now, I mentioned at the top two, we were gonna go through and do the same model but utilizing a control variable. Um, once again, our, our effect of our initial model was not statistically significant, meaning that the effect of increasing the benefits of workers' compensation did not have a meaningful effect on the number of weeks people stayed on their workers' compensation benefits. Um, But let's improve though. Let's introduce a control variable to try and improve our model's precision. So we wanna eat up some more uh of the, the error to try and get a more precise estimate. Now, long story short, we're probably not gonna see a change when we run this, uh, but let's go ahead and see. Oh, and forgive me, we're introducing, um, that variable I mentioned, the high earners variable. Uh, that just tells us whether or not it's a flag, a treatment flag of, of 0, not a treatment flag, pardon me, it's just a flag indicating 1, this person classified as a high earner, meaning that their compensation benefit was deemed high enough to be a high earner. Otherwise, 0 for a non-high earner. And that would be based on the amount of money that they earned before the accident. So let's introduce that into our model. Everything else stays exactly the same, and then we just add that in. Same thing with the intercept. bottom equals false. Um, make sure you introduce a label correctly for that. Let's run the new model. I already did that, so that was a redundant step. So we see here that our model, uh, coefficients changed a little bit. The average pre-intervention period, uh, pre-intervention value for our control group was reduced by about 1.5. Uh, but changed nonetheless, still significantly different from zero. introducing that changed our delta in the pre-intervention period between our control and treatment group. So it's now actually our, uh, control group is OK. I was gonna say the inverse. The treatment groups average in the pre-intervention period is about 4.4.5 less than that of our control group. In the post-intervention, or sorry, the secular trend is pretty darn similar and still statistically significant. It was reduced by a few decimal points and importantly, our difference in difference estimator is still not statistically significant and pretty similar. But we did find that high earners stay on their benefits for significantly longer, um, 5.24 weeks, so 5 and a quarter weeks longer for those that are high earners. So that is a quite interesting finding. Now, I would, uh, I would recommend you go through and utilize this data set and try and build out your own models incorporating different control variables, um, and see how the effects change by controlling for some more of that variance. Um, what else do you find that's statistically significant? Uh, uh, does your difference in difference estimator chain? Um, or not. Uh, and, and play around with it. This would be a great example of, of building out different models and testing different hypotheses. Now, moving on, let's, uh, this section is going to be setting you up specifically for your lab where you do have to differentiate between a difference in difference model and an interrupted time series model like we've Learned about last week. So I just want to reset, talk a little bit more, or remind you about what we learned with the interrupted time series, uh, and then compare that to your difference in difference, uh, models. So let's talk about when we use E and what, uh, uh, data points we take into consideration to pick one or the other. So first, talking about the data structure. So when it comes to utilizing an interrupted time series, if we look at the data structure and we're only operating with a single group, And we have, uh, excuse me. Just the treatment group, and we have a pre and post period, we are limited to utilizing an interrupted time series model. Cause once again, the interrupted time series, based on what we did is a reflexive study, and that allows us to use the pre-intervention slope of our treatment group to be our counterfactual or to calculate our counterfactual. If we have two groups with a pre and post-period assessment or values, that would be um setting us up to utilize a difference in difference model. If we're talking about multiple data points pre and post-period um with two groups. Then we're probably moving more into a world of a fixed effect model, which we'll learn about next week. But long story short, between the two, ITS and difference in difference, that is a, uh, that is the distinguishing difference between them. Now, the key requirement for a difference in difference is that parallel trends assumption we've discussed. Uh, and then for the interrupted time series, uh, um, we're reliant on having enough observations to have a valid pre and post-intervention period, uh, to be able to make those, to build that counterfactual and have enough data points to, uh, um, of a, a historical view and a post-intervention view. Uh, talking about the counterfactual, we already went over this. Um, the control groups change is the counterfactual in the difference in difference model, while the, uh, pre-treatment slope is that in our interrupted time series. So beta 1 is gonna be the pre-treatment slope in our interrupted time series, while beta 2 represents that secular trend in our difference model. So if we have a control group, we should utilize a difference in difference depending on the data structure itself. If we have multiple data points, that'll be moving more into a fixed effect model again. We'll learn about that next week. If we don't have a comparison group and a single point in time when an intervention occurred, interrupted time series is a great way to go. So now, recapping the two models. Um, we just went over this one, so I won't recap it, but we can see it here for the difference in difference. To remind you of the interrupted time series, you have your outcome variable, your constant, uh, your average at the very beginning, and then you have your time. This is a, uh, continuous variable, so it's 12345 representing the different units of time within our, um, within our data set. We have our treatment flag representing 0 or 1, if the treatment has or has not occurred at that point in time. And then importantly, we have our time since, which is 0 up until the intervention, and then 1 continuously ever after. So it's um 1 at 0 at the day of intervention, 1 the day after, 2 the following day, 345, etc. And that represents our uh change in the post-treatment trend. And then the treatment represents the initial jump or the change, uh, um, the up or down right at the point of intervention. And then time represents our pre-intervention slope. And if you need to, you can always go back to last week's resources to review that. Trend. In our difference in difference model, that's going to be represented by beta 2. So again, that's the change in the control group is what we use as the secular trend. That's what we use to calculate our counterfactual. In our interrupted time series, we use the pre-treatment slope, which is represented by beta 1. That's our, uh, that's our time variable. When we're talking about the immediate effect for the difference in difference, we're looking at our difference in difference estimator, that's beta 3, that is our treatment effect, as opposed to the interrupted time series model, that's going to be beta 2, that's that initial level shift, that jump or that chain at the treatment intercept. And if we're talking about the sustained effect, that's not, that's not calculated um separately within the difference in difference model. It's actually taking the entire post-intervention period and finding that average. Uh, so it's not a single variable like it would be in the interrupted time series. The interrupted time series, beta 3 represents that change in the slope. So if our slope shifted -1, then we subtract the -1 from our pre-intervention slope. And then that gives us our post-intervention actual slope. Remember that beta 3 represents the delta, its face value. The coefficient is the delta, which is just telling us the difference or the change uh in the pre-intervention slope. lab that can get a little tricky. Um, but once you understand, uh, conceptually, It's a lot easier. So I'm gonna go through an example with you here that hopefully sets the stage. But as always, if you have questions, post in the discussion threads, uh, and I'll be, uh, uh, happy to get back to you or shoot me a message. When we're talking about, um, uh, oh forgive me, I, I'm gonna skipped a section here, but uh it, it's the same thing we've already talked about. Um. When we're, we're going through this example, let's just frame this example and then I'll walk you through it. So, in a difference in difference model, we're saying our beta 2 is going to be 5. This is our secular trend, recall. Uh, so the control group's outcome increased by 5 units from pre to post-period. Now, an interrupted time series model, our beta 1, this is our time variable. This is our, um, pre-intervention slope is 0.5. So what we're saying is if we have 10 units of time in our pre-intervention period, so for every, uh, uh, I should have plotted this out and I didn't, but bear with me here. Let's say on the x-axis, we have our time variable, and in our pre-intervention period, we have, um, we'll just call it 20 ticks on our x-axis, and then our outcome variable Y over here, but we're saying that for every um Uh, on our x axis, the slope goes up by Y or our Y value increases by 0.5. So we're saying, uh, if we want to know our secular trend in the pre-intervention period, we would need to say we have 10 time periods in the pre-intervention period, and our, our, uh, uh. slope is 0.5. So for every tick, we're going up 0.5. We would simply need to take 0.5, multiply it by 10, and that would give us our pre-intervention secular trend. Or we could call it, uh, uh, assuming that that is across the board, let's say there's 5-time periods pre-intervention, 5-time periods post-intervention. We would say that our entire secular trend is 0.5 times those 10 units of time we have, uh, equaling a secular trend of 5. So, our pre to post-intervention period increased by 5. I, I hope that makes sense. Uh, I should have built out a Uh, a better visualization for everybody here. Um, depending on how this module goes and the lab goes, how many questions we get, I'll probably do a, a debrief after the lab itself is graded, uh, to walk everybody through what the questions we're trying to get out here. But ultimately, we're just saying, If you're working with the difference in difference uh model, remember that that is the aggregated value of the secular trend, whereas in the interrupted time series model, that is the disaggregated, that is a per unit shift, whereas the secular trend and the difference in difference is the aggregated change. Uh, hopefully, that makes sense. Long story short, you're just gonna need to either divide the secular trend by a certain value or multiply the, uh, interrupted time series coefficient, uh, by a certain value, the number of units, in order to get a comparison between the two. Hopefully, that makes sense. All right. Now, let's wrap everything up and get you off to the races with your lab. Uh, let's plot our, um, uh, earlier model again without the control variable. This takes us back to our original estimates. And then we're gonna do a final wrap up here, just a nice clean output to re-demonstrate that the average for the Michigan, for the state of Michigan, the control group in the pre-intervention was 12 weeks. We found that our treatment group, Kentucky, had 3 3/4 less weeks on average that people stayed on workers' compensation benefits in the pre-intervention period, and that was statistically significant, so our groups were statistically significantly different before intervention. Our secular trend represented by beta 2 was showing that over the period of time that was being observed between the pre and post-period. The number of weeks spent on workers' compensation increased by roughly 3.5 weeks for those in Kent in Michigan, excuse me, that was statistically significant. And then finally, our treatment effect, our difference in difference estimator was -2.17, uh, which would have suggested if it were statistically significant, that the, uh, Increasing of workers' compensation benefits in Kentucky in 1980 decreased the amount of weeks that people stayed on those benefits. However, this was not statistically significant. Therefore, that increase in benefits did not have a meaningful effect. And then once again, we calculated that by removing beta 3 and using beta 1, beta 2, sorry, beta0, beta 1, beta 2, adding all those together. Our counterfactual put us at 11.74 weeks. That's what our model is saying our Kentucky group would have been had treatment not occurred. We calculated that to be 9.57, was their actual post-treatment average. Leaving us with a uh uh effect or a difference of 2.17, but once again, not statistically significant. Therefore, we did not observe a meaningful difference in the weeks uh staying on workers' compensation benefits in Kentucky versus Michigan. Um, so, therefore, our treatment effect did not have a real effect. OK, folks, um, lots to go through. Appreciate your time. Please reach out with any questions, and good luck on this week's lab.