Welcome class to module 6. This will be our last module and we will discuss logistic regression or logit models. By now, you should have reviewed the lecture materials coming into this. Uh, this one will be fairly straightforward. No new packages outside of what you learned in lecture. Uh, we'll show you how to, uh, actually complete the, uh, questions that will be similarly aligned with your lab. Uh, and then just iron out a couple of details about loget models, LPM. Um, and try and set you up so you're ready for your lab, but also so you can move forward in your own evaluation, um, attempts, practices, uh, your work at, uh, at incorporating logistic regression. OK. What are we gonna cover today? We're gonna first start, uh, first start, excuse me, by just recapping when we use the, uh, logistic regression or a logit model or a linear probability model. Uh, and again, that boils down to just using a binary outcome. Uh, so it's either something happened or it didn't happen. And then we'll talk a little bit about log odds, odds ratios, probabilities, marginal effects. Um, those have historically been the areas where students get caught up, uh, get a little more confused, um, or questions. And so I just wanna try and bridge that gap a little more than the lecture did, uh, and then really tie the knot on what the most important things are you need to walk away with as far as this course, um, and, uh, Uh, taking the interpretation of a logistic regression and making it meaningful. So we'll cover that. Uh, for our data set this week, we're gonna be looking at the rescid data set from the Wooldridge package. It's looking at recidivism and variables that predict recidivism, meaning, um, going back to jail after being released. Uh, we'll talk briefly. Uh, this section here is actually just, uh, we, I ended up changing this to be just an instructor's note. I was gonna go over it in a lot more depth, but I don't think it's that necessary. Uh, this is just talking about scaling our variables, kind of like we had in the fixed effects module. Um, we had to, uh, change how we interpreted our beer taxes coefficient because it was in a decimal form and that was represented as a 0 to 1 change. Meaning a 0% tax to a 100% tax. Um, and that's, uh, not super meaningful. So we have to do something similar for our lab. Anyways, that's now an instructor's note. I'll go over with you. We'll talk about the linear probability model. We'll run it, interpret it, um, talk about its, it's, uh, shortcomings, um, but also how it can actually be really decent directionally depending on the data that we're feeding it. Uh, we'll use the login model, do some side by sides, uh, go over some questions and interpretations you'll have to do for your labs. Uh, the, uh, interpretations are already covered that. We'll use predict. We're also importantly going to use the, um, uh, a manual method for calculating probability using the probability formula, which you need to do in your lab. We'll, uh, calculate some discrete changes, and then we'll, uh, plot the S curve, uh, which again, you'll need to do for your lab. Um, now, with marginal effects, we're gonna talk about marginal effects using the margins package. We'll, uh, talk about the average marginal effect and how we can calculate different marginal effects, uh, based on different, uh, group criteria. But we'll do a policy example or a policy question example too at the end, which will be similar to what you'll do in your lab. And then we'll just wrap it all up, uh, talk about our takeaways. All right. Uh, I'm gonna not spend too much time on this, but, um, I felt like it was really important for students to be aware and, and sort of to reiterate that we need to be cognizant of our underlying data. Uh, calling back to the beer or the, yeah, the beer tax is coefficient in the fixed effects module. We had to divide our coefficient by 100 in order to get a 1% uh change means this coefficient. Uh, whereas if we feed our model a Uh, variable that is representing a proportion, and it's in a decimal format, so 0.07 represents a 7% beer tax. Um, our model would interpret that as a one unit change, being a 0% to a 100% beer tax. And that's not very meaningful or realistic. So in that model, or in that module, we just had you divide by 100 or multiply by 0.01, ultimately to ascertain the 1% change being our one unit change in X. In this lab, the original data set that was provided by Jesse Lessy, uh, who was the original creator of, uh, most of these instruction materials, um, he has 3 variables, uh, representing different proportions of the population in different states, um. And those were all represented in decimal format, again as a percentage of the population. So for example, you have Democrats without the underscore S in the original data set, and that was, uh, just throwing out a number, 0.26. So 26% of the population were. Democrats. Uh, the model, the output would have represented that chain as a 0% Democrats to a 100% Democrats. And again, that's not realistic, it's not very meaningful. So there were two options. You could have gone down the path of where every single time you had the coefficient come out, you would have to then convert that to be in a 1% unit change as opposed to a 0% to 100% unit change. In order to avoid having to do that, I simply scaled those columns at the source for you. And by scaled, I mean I uh converted them from being a decimal format of 0 to 1 to instead be just 0 to 100, representing the um uh percentage of the population. So we just did what you would otherwise do on your coefficients, but we did it at the column level, so you didn't have to worry about scaling every time you add a new coefficient. It would have been pretty Um, redundant in this lab, but I wanted to call it out for you so you're aware of the reason why we did that. Uh, and then also if you go forward into doing more work or doing your own interpretations, uh, or sorry, any, any evaluations you do, uh, analysis you do, Cognizant of how the model will interpret your variables and then scale accordingly. Ideally, scaling at the source level, the column level is gonna be the most ideal. All right, I spent a, I spent a little longer on that than I wanted to, uh, but hopefully that drives home the point. Uh. Outcomes being yes or no. So, uh, logistic regression is when we're working with, um, a, uh, a question of did an event happen or did it not? Did a student graduate or not? Did the patient, um, recover from the treatment or did they not? Uh, in our case, for this lab, we're gonna be using recidivism. Uh, I keep saying lab for getting our, our code through. We'll be using recidivism data and asking what characteristics predict the probability of recidivism, meaning somebody gets out of prison, then goes back to prison. Um, we'll be looking at different, uh, variables and characteristics that, uh, uh, allow us to get that, but ultimately, the question is, did they go back to prison or not? Um, so if we have an outcome variable that's either or, then we're working, or then we'll need a logistic regression. Now, the challenge is, um, If we were to simply do an LM model, uh, again, we can do it as we talked about with the linear probability model and as you read about within the, uh, the lecture material, that is an option, but it's not bounded, meaning the outcome of our probability or, our, our, um, probabilities are not bounded between 0 and 1, which is what would make the most sense. Probabilities exist between 0 and 1. something happened, it didn't happen, where in between is the likelihood that it happened? Now, uh, the LPM model is not bounded between 0 and 1. And so if we just were to do the, the same LM model, we could get a negative coefficient, a positive coefficient, or sorry, something that's over 1, and that's not really meaningful, 1.3. What does that even mean? That's 130% possibility, probability that it happens, but 100% probability means that it happens. So what does an extra 30% mean? Um, it's not super meaningful. So that's a big challenge of it. So the question is, what do we do in order to resolve that, uh, shortcoming of the linear probability model. Um, another thing being that it, uh, courses that straight line to fit, uh, assuming a, an equal slope for everybody, when in reality, when you're talking about probabilities, the effect of different variables, the effect of a different treatment. would be different depending on where on the curve you fall. And remember that um the, I, I, one of the major parts of the logit model is that it, the data is fitted to an S curve, meaning that at different points along that curve, you're going to have a different uh increase or decrease in probability. Uh, we'll talk about that when we talk about marginal effects here shortly. Um, all right. I'm not gonna spend too much time here, uh, but just to reiterate, we have, uh, 45, not listed here, 1/5 1, but it's very similar to these. So, long story short, we got 4 units. Um, when we're first and foremost working with the linear probability model, our raw coefficients are going to be probability. Meaning all we have to do is multiply by 100 to turn it into a percent. Otherwise, it's just gonna exist between, well, ideally 0 and 1, but it's not restricted between 0 and 1 from our LPM model. Uh, so long story short, when we're working with a linear probability model, um, our coefficients are in probability units. Important to differentiate that. Now, more importantly, is when we're working with our logit model using the GLM function, our units, our rad units are in log ots. What does that mean? It just means that that is the mathematical background utilized or the mathematical mechanism used in the background in order to fit a a clean line and to ascertain what a 1 unit increase in X changes, uh, the log odds. So log odds is the unit that the math needs in order to ascertain these. What does that mean for us as far as interpreting this and having a meaningful inference? Not much. Uh, it's Very important, but we can't do anything with it as far as communicating a policy impact to stakeholders. So what do we do? We have 3 options. Um, one is we can convert those to odds ratios. It's very easy. We simply exponentiate those values, um, and that gives us a multiple. So if you were, uh, I have a, if you have an odds ratio, excuse me, let's say you have a, the, uh, forgive me, I almost jumped ahead. I'm gonna stick here, um, uh, go through these, and then we're gonna go to some examples. I almost jumped the gun. So odds ratios, think of it as a multiple, uh, 2 X, 3 X. If your odds ratio is 6, then that means that the, uh, whatever the variable is, then your coefficient or that variable, um, Multiplies your probability by 6X. The problem and the limitation with odds ratio is we don't know what X is, so we're very limited. Cool, if, if 6X is my probability, but if my probability is 1 in a million, and it goes to 6 in a million, it's not a meaningful change in probability. So without knowing X, as far as what multiplying by what, then it's uh not super helpful. Um, with that being said, uh, I didn't mention this before, but you see it here. Uh, log odds are a negative infinity to positive infinity. It basically stretches everything out as much as possible to create a linear line, um, to, to figure out what the one unit change is. But then we bring it back to odds ratios by exponentiating it. When we're talking about odds ratios, those are bounded between zero and infinity. So, important to understand, an odds ratio is call it centered at 1, and 1 means there's no effect. Again, as a multiple, if you're multiplying something by 1, it's the same as it was. So 1 is a no effect situation. Anything below 1 and 0 and above 0 is a a reduction in Um, the odds that the thing happens. Anything above 1 is an increase in the odds that things happen, but it could be, you know, 500,000. What exactly does that mean in terms of like, what the equivalent uh negative value would be or the reduction value would be. So it's not very meaningful, it's confusing, the scale. Excuse me. Um, but just know, anything above 1, positive, increase in odds. Anything below 1, reduction in odds, 1 itself is negative. Uh, OK, so probability, this is among the most meaningful. Um, it's bounded between 0 and 1. So again, it either happens, it doesn't happen, or somewhere in between is the the, the probability, the percentage chance that it happens. Uh, and then this is also very specific though, meaning we have to feed all the other variables in our model into this in order, or, or into the probability formula in order to um. the probability of a given situation, given person, given characteristics, um, etc. So we do have to feed it all of those variables. We have to make some assumptions there. Uh, marginal effect, this is going to be the plus or minus to probability. This would say, uh, in the example of our data set, um, I'm doing it, I'm getting ahead of myself here, but I'm gonna go ahead and do it anyway. Uh, it's a plus or minus meaning if we were to have a, uh, a history of drug abuse. What is the plus or minus to my probability that I will be uh uh recidivate, meaning go back to prison. Um. If, uh, that's a, if having a history of drug abuse increases the probability that you're gonna go back to prison or recidivate, uh, then it would be a positive marginal effect, meaning it increases the probability. But again, think about it just as that, it's the plus or minus to your probability. Uh, and it all depends on where on that S curve you fall, so it's not constant. Um, the marginal effect is very different, uh, for two different people. It is not constant across. So somebody who has, um, 5 prior convictions versus somebody who has 0 prior convictions would have a different marginal effect because of where they would fall on the S curve, which we'll see shortly. OK. So let's go through some examples. Um, let's say that we did a, uh, GLM function, so the logit model. Are, um Uh, variable here, our outcome variable is whether or not they were re-arrested. If it's one, they were re-arrested, and the coefficient we're specifically looking at is drugs, and we're saying that the log odds value of drugs is 0.693. So let's go through each of these models, uh, each of these, um, possibilities here. So first, log odds. The raw value is 6.93. What does that mean? Not a whole lot. It means for a one unit change in uh drugs, there's going to be an increase in the log odds by 0.6. 93. So, not super meaningful cause what does that even mean? What is it, how do we interpret that as like a real thing? Uh, that's why we have to convert it. So first, let's convert it to an odds ratio. That's the easiest thing. All we have to do is exponentiate it. So let's say that our odds ratio, or pardon me, our, um, Uh, the rug coefficient, excuse me, is 0.693. So we're going to say odds ratio is the exponentiated value of our beta, and then our our beta is 0.693, so we exponentiate that, and that gets us to about 2. It's 1.9997, something like that. So it gets us to 2. So this is saying our odds ratio is 2, therefore, drumroll please, at 2 x is our probabilities. What does X mean? Who knows? Um, so not very helpful, but we know it doubles our odds. Uh, so that's great. Um, but it does it go from 1 to 1 in a million to 2 in a million? Not super meaningful. Uh, I already went over this, but just to recap, an odds ratio being that it's a multiple. Odds ratio of 1 is no effect. Anything greater than that is a positive effect and your odds increase. Um, and forgive me, I believe I've gone back and forth and said, It's referring to the probabilities. Um, that's a misspeak. It's the, uh, odds specifically. So an odds ratio is referring to the increase or decrease in your odds, and it's the multiple. Um, so forgive me if I did say probability earlier, it's technically your odds, not the probability. Uh, OK. Now, log odds to probability. Again, this is the more specific one. This is way more meaningful because we can say for this, uh, category of people, the average person we could calculate the, uh, somebody with 5 prior convictions and uh 3-year original sentence, and, uh, No history of drug abuse or alcohol abuse. What's their probability of recidivating? We can calculate that very granularly by plugging in these different variables, these assumptions, um, or characteristics. So how do we go from log-outs to probability? We have two options. One, the manual approach, which you do have to do in your lab, so be ready. Um, we'll show you how to do it in this, but, um, yeah, just be ready. So we're saying the pro the, the probability formula, excuse me, is gonna be 1. Over 1 plus the exponentiated value of your model minus or uh times -1. Uh, so the negative of that. Uh, and you're gonna have to do that within your lab. Uh, you'll just lay it out using code. So let's then say that um we want to just look at the, the average of every variable, and we're gonna say that that combination is 1.2, -1.2. So we plug that into our model, again, our model being the um our, our, sorry, the probability formula being this up here. Let's plug that in. So our probability for the average across all of our variables is gonna be 1/1 plus the exponentiated value of -1 times -1.2, ultimately brings us to um a uh exponentiated, sorry, an odds ratio. Goodness gracious, a probability, forgive me, of 0.231, meaning that there is a 23.1% probability that the average person is going to be re-arrested or recidivate. This is not based on the actual data, this is just faux data for example purposes. Um, so that is not technically the, that, that is not gonna match up with our data we actually run. Don't be surprised when you see that. So again, this means that the probability for the average person to recidivate is 23.1%. Now, let's change it though, and let's say that we want to turn on our drug flag, meaning that they had a um history of drug abuse. So we're gonna have the same exact average, so -1.2, but remember that our coefficient, um, the, the log odds effect of drug abuse is 0.693. So we add that to our model, so we have We have our original averages here, -1.2. We have our drug abuse coefficient here, that gets us a value of -0.507. Same probability formula, gets us over to a probability of 0.376 or 37.6% chance of re-arrest or recidivism. So what's the difference? The probability increases from 23.1% with no drug use, or the average drug use I should say is technically correct, to 37.6% with uh Uh, history of drug abuse. We call this the discrete change. That's the difference between these two scenarios, uh, the difference in probability between these two scenarios. So ultimately that's telling us that the discrete change or the change in probability for a person with a history of drug abuse is an increase of 14.5% points that they will be re-arrested. Now, marginal effect, this is going to be calculating the instantaneous rate of change at a specific point on our S curve. So this is really important because again, the marginal effect is not constant. It's going to be different depending on where on that curve you fall. Uh, so if we were to have somebody again who has a history of drug abuse versus somebody who doesn't, they would fall at different points on that curve, and therefore the slope at different points on that curve is different. Um, so in order to calculate the marginal effect, we would look at this particular arrangement and say for this person, what is their slope based on where they fall on the curve. So if they move one unit up, one unit down, um, That we have to look at the curve or reference the curve and see where that would be because the slope changes. Uh, to provide a little context, here is our typical S curve. And if we were to say the, the, well, the slope is always going to be steepest at the center. Uh, and so we have here, anything that's around the center is going to have a much steeper slope than those around here where the slope is a lot lower. It's, uh, significantly less steep. Uh, and so, um, somebody who has a log odds of zero, a probability of 0.5, uh, a 1 unit change in drug abuse, uh, meaning that you turn on drug coefficient, uh, would increase this slope significantly more than somebody who was all the way down here, uh, had a very unlikely chance of recidivating. Uh, turn on drugs, uh, then that would kick them up, you know, a lot less because of the slope itself. It would, um, uh, impactful. So, hopefully, that makes sense. Um, as always, if you have questions, clarifications, please let me know. Um, last thing I didn't touch on here is the marginal effect is again the plus or minus. So it's saying, uh, what is the effect of drug abuse on Uh, a history of drug abuse, excuse me, um, for person A, it's going to be different than person B. Now, we wanna talk about the average marginal effect, and what that's ultimately doing is it's counting the marginal or calculating the marginal effect for every situation in our data set. So every row is a different observation, a different person, um, with different characteristics. So we're gonna calculate the marginal effect for every single person in our data set, of which we have, I think, almost 1500 in our resci package. Um, and then we're going to average those effects, and that is our average marginal effect, which is that general term that we can say. Um, the impact of a history of drug abuse and has an average marginal effect of, call it 10%, meaning there is a, uh, increase in probability of re-arrest equal to about 10% if you have a history of drug abuse. Hopefully, that makes sense. Recap the linear probability model, it assumes a consistent, um, uh, constant, excuse me, uh, linear. Slope. Whereas the logitt model does the S curve, and so it's completely dependent on where on the curve you fall, um, what your slope is at that point. Um, so let's move on. Um, what do I need to walk away with? Long story short, log odds, it's what GLM produces. They're not easy to interpret. We can do an odds ratio, but that gives us a multiple. That multiple doesn't tell us what it's multiplying by. And so it's not very realistic. It's confusing. Um, then we have probabilities which are more specific. It gives us the, the exact probability based on different, um, Constraints, assumptions, characteristics that we plug in. And then we have the marginal effect, which again is ascertaining the, the specific slope for every different, for, for different combinations. Uh, and it all depends on where on the curve they fall. And then we have really like the, the bread and butter, the real, real generalized impact option, which is the average marginal effect. And we can do all of this using margins, uh, the margins package, which we'll do later. So, long story short, you just need to know how to convert to ultimately get probability, um, average marginal effect, marginal effect. Now, talking about our data set, again, we're looking at recidivism here. We wanna know within the observation window of the data, which is up to 81 months, but it differs depending on um the inmate that was released and therefore how long they were observed. Um, so it's different, but it was up to 81 months. Uh, it's from the Wooldridge package. You can use this in R, you can analyze this yourself. It's a really great package uh with lots of data sets to work with for data science. Uh, it's gonna have about 1500, excuse me to clear my throat. Uh, so we have about 1500 different, uh, inmates that we'll observe. Um, and then this is again in the Wooldridge package, so we're gonna, if you don't have it, you can install it. Uh, we have stargazer as normal, sandwich. This allows us to do our robust standard errors, LM tests so that we can do, um, the coefficient testing with robust standard errors, and then margins so that we can do the marginal effects, the average marginal effects, etc. All right, so we're gonna load our data using data. And then the rescid is what it's called. Let's go ahead and just start looking at, I had to pause to uh rerun those uh packages. OK, so, uh, we loaded our data set. Um, and now we're going to reassign our variables. So importantly, importantly, the, uh, original data set had the flags flipped from how we want them. So they have the variable censored, uh, which they had originally flagged as if, uh, censored equals 0, it meant to re-arrest, whereas if censored equaled 1, there was no re-arrest, at least within the study window. We wanna flip that because we want our uh outcome variable to be uh the rearrest, cause we wanna look at recidivism. And so all we're going to do here is flip that. So we're gonna create a new column called rearrested, and we're gonna say, if rescid censored was one, Meaning not arrested, then we're gonna flip that to be 0 cause we want our rearrested to be, sorry, not re-arrested, um, to be 0, and we want re-arrested to be 1. So if they were arrested, 1. If they were not arrested, 0. So we're gonna go ahead and run that there. And I already got this output here, but let's just clear it. Um, cool. So, uh, this is just an extra check that I chose to do. So I have the, um, our new column that we assigned, so re-arrested, and it should be the exact opposite of the original censored variable. And in this case, our, uh, uh, our logic shows that we have 893 of these uh inmates that were not re-arrested, at least within the observation window. And then 552 that were. Opposite of that, we had 552 that were um re-arrested and 893 that were not, and they're just flipped based on the flag. So, we're just doing this so we can uh have our new column called re-arrested. We will not be utilizing centered uh in the rest of this. So we can see that the amount of people that were re-arrested was 38% of our uh data set. Um, and then let's talk about some of the key variables, and actually, I'm gonna pull this up. There's a lot more variables than we're using, uh, but we're using a good chunk of them. So we have whether or not an inmate was black. Whether or not they had a history of alcohol abuse, whether or not they had a history of drug abuse. Uh, I can't remember offhand what super, I I am a supervised. Mm, forgive me, it's supervised, uh, some kind of supervision, and I'm, forgive me, I'm blanking on what this one was. We don't use it. Uh, if they were married, if it was a felony conviction, if they're part of a work program, Uh, we don't use this one either, but I, if I remember correctly, this is if the crime was against the property, uh, like they damaged the property, larson, burglary, something like that. Uh, person, I believe, um, again, we don't use it if I remember correctly. Um, this is whether or not The crime was committed against a person, assault, something like that. Priors is the number of prior convictions that they have. 0, meaning that this was their first conviction. This is one that they have just been released for and therefore that we are observing. Education is in years. of years as a um Um, 9th grade would be 9. So, uh, if the year variable is, um, I'm sorry, education variable is 9, that would mean they made it to 9th grade. Uh, now the rules, this is the number of, uh, rules that I believe were broken. While incarcerated, ages and months, importantly, um, we could have converted this. I, I, the originally, that scaling section was going to be converting this to years, but not the same, and so we just kept it as months. Um, time served is the number of months that they were served, or they, they served. And, uh, follow, we don't use this either, but this is the amount of time that they were followed post-release. And then again, censored was our original one where 0 meant re-arrested, 1 meant uh not re-arrested within the observation period. And we have our new column here and we can see that the inverse is true, that the uh um sensor variable is the opposite of a re-arrested variable. OK. So now that we've got an idea of the data, uh, we already went through some of these, but again, just to recap, um, the ones we will be using are re-arrested. That's our outcome variable. The work program, whether or not they participated in a prison work program, the number of priors, that's a continuous variable, uh, time served, that's in months, importantly. Felon, that just means it was a felony conviction, yes or no. Alcohol, if there's And a, a history of alcohol abuse, drugs, same thing, uh, black if they are black or not, married, uh, and that's at the time of incarceration. Uh, education in years, age in months, and then rules, again, the number of rule violations while in prison. I think I might have said we don't use this one, that's my mistake. Um, I don't remember if I said that. All right. So now, let's go ahead and get some, uh, summary statistics here. Uh, recall that stargazer can be kind of funny if you wanna try and subset. Um, or index directly a bunch of, uh, uh, columns. So, uh, to make things easy, I like to just save the variable or the column names that I want to a variable, and then subset the variable names there. Excellent. So, we've got our almost 1500 observations across the board here. The average, um, Here for censored, that means not arrested was 62%. The inverse of that for those re-arrested was 38%. So again, we're looking to see an outcome variable of those that were re-arrested. So what factors predict the probability of re-arrest? We see work program, uh, nearly half of people participated in a work program. Priors, the average person had 1.43 priors. Average person served about a little over 19 months in prison. Uh, only 31, uh, um. 31% of our population here were felony convictions. 21% had alcohol problems, 24 drug problems, uh, nearly half were black, a quarter were married. Most had about 9th grade, uh, almost to 10th grade, almost completed 9th grade, um, education, and then 345 months, um, I can't remember what that adds up to as far as. Uh, average age, uh, and then the, each person had an average of 1.19, um, rules broken while incarcerated. All right, so, uh, jumping into the linear probability model, again, um, I just wanna reiterate, this is not necessarily a bad model. There are definitely limitations. But directionally, this can be a great, easy, quick model to give you probabilities right off the rip and not have to um convert anything, uh, uh, and do any of that additional nuance. And if your model is generally normally distributed, meaning most of your, um, Data centered around the middle there. Uh, then, and not so much at the tails, like if you've got a very right skewed or left skewed data set, um, then you might not be able to use this model, or, uh, the LPM model. But as far as directionality, LPM can be a great model. So, uh, just throwing that out there, not bad. You still need to, uh, uh, calculate robust standard errors to resolve the heteroscholasticity problem. Uh, but just a heads up, it's still a pretty good, at least starting point to give you a Uh, some directionality with the data and the effects of the variables. So we go ahead and save it to the ELPM, um, object, and then let's run it in Stargazer here. So we can see the average uh uh probability of re-arrest and again, LPM automatically outputs probability in decimal format, so we can say the average person has a 51.67% chance of being arrested or probability of being re-arrested within the observation window, I should say. Uh, and then those who, interestingly, um, those who participate in the work program have, uh, there's no significant effect of the work program. Um, and even if it was, it's, uh, looks kind of small. If you participate in a work program, at best, if it was statistically significant, you would see a 2.5% increase in your likelihood, but that's even positive actually. Um, you'd see a 2.5% increase in your likelihood of being re-arrested. That's not good. Uh, prior convictions, for every additional, remember this is continuous, so for every additional prior conviction one has, their probability of being re-arrested goes up in the tune of 2.5, 2.6%. Um, so prior convictions stack up quite a bit. The longer you serve, the more likely you are to be re-arrested. So for every additional month that you serve, your probability of being re-arrested goes up to the tune of 0.32%. Um, seems small, but months add up fast. Felony sentence, if you got a felony sentence, your probability of being re-arrested within the window actually goes down significantly. Uh, to the tune of 8.67% as far as the reduction goes. Um, so that's impressive. Uh, alcohol problems, uh, having alcohol problems significantly increases your chances of re-arrest to almost 12% or by almost 12%. Um, curiously, drugs not as impactful. A history of drug abuse increases your chances of re-arrest or your probability of re-arrest. Still statistically significant. But, I mean, almost half of what alcohol um effects are. So interesting to see. Now, I wanna touch on this coefficient here um that is included in the original data set, and it's important though to sort of unpack everything that's included. It's, it's a very impactful variable why I wanted to include it. But whenever we're working, With an analysis, uh, looking at uh uh a variable with, with race, in this case, specifically, looking at whether or not somebody was black. Um, again, there's a lot that feeds into this variable. It is very important to interpret this with caution. So rather than suggesting that there is an inherent link between race and recidivism, it's Also, that this variable is capturing things that aren't measured in the data set. Uh, these could be disparities in policing intensity, over policing certain areas, um, compared to others, uh, over penalizing, um, different demographics more than others, uh, uh, different socioeconomic statuses and opportunities and, um, uh, issues again with the, the judicial system or the, the paroling system. Um, just wanna really hone in and focus on and focus on that when we're looking at this data set, there's a lot that feeds in to this coefficient, and if we were to simply interpret it at its face value and, um, uh, and, uh, say that black people, therefore, uh, are more likely to return to jail, um, it, it wouldn't necessarily be the most appropriate, uh, interpretation. With that being said, um, the data shows that those who are black have a 12.5% increased probability to be re-arrested. One final reiteration, there is so much that would feed into that in terms of the over-policing, um, the, uh, uh, difference in the judicial system experience between different races. Um, all that to say, uh, please keep those types of things in mind as you interpret these, uh, as you evaluate, as well as analyze, uh, and use these, uh, data sets that are available for your own analysis. OK. That being said, moving on to marriage. So again, this was married meaning when they were first incarcerated, they were married. They could have since been divorced. Uh, but importantly, marriage was not a significant, uh, change, so it didn't have a sta a statistically significant impact on whether or not somebody recidivated. Education in terms of the number of years they had for education. Interestingly enough, I, I would otherwise think that um educate more education would be better at reducing recidivism, but according to the data set, uh, it did not have a statistically significant impact. In terms of months, I'm sorry, age and months. The older you were, the less likely you were, the less probable it was that you would be re-arrested. That's another one that um could be touched on as well. Younger people generally, uh, if you were to Plot out arrests rates. Uh, it's generally going to be younger people. As you get older, you get less people being arrested. Um, other things could feed into that other than simply age. But importantly, according to this data set with our, um, linear probability model, uh, for every additional month of age, you're Uh, probability of being re-arrested is reduced to the tune of 0.07%. Um, and again, that seems like a small coefficient, but we're working in terms of months, and so that adds up pretty quick. Uh, last one is the number of rule violations when you were incarcerated. Statistically significant, uh, and it does increase your likelihood of recidivism. For every additional rule violation, the probability of being re-arrested goes up to the tune of 1.3, 1.4%, uh, for every additional rule. So, um, Last thing here, uh, just final reiteration, linear probability model, not necessarily bad, has its limitations, which we'll go over, uh, but it can be very, uh, directionally through. Um, so it gives us an idea of what we're working with here. Now, uh, I already went through this, so I'm not gonna actually reiterate this. Um, I have a tendency just to, uh, skip my notes and go straight into it. OK. So recall that, um, in our OLS assumptions, in order to hold true, uh, we assume Homoschodastic residuals. Meaning that if we were to plot our residuals, uh, there would be no detectable patterns. There wouldn't be fanning, there wouldn't be, um, any kind of like, if you recall the autocorrelation, there wouldn't be any kind of up and down in our residuals. Um, uh, so that means it would be homo schodastic. That's our assumption. The problem though is that when we have, uh, a two outcome. Outcome variable, so when it's binary, it can never be homo schodastic. Uh, to demonstrate that. Here is going to be a visualization that shows uh uh homo schodastic. This is our residuals here, um, plotted out. We can see that it's fairly evenly distributed, no real pattern to do the uh linear probability model where we only have two outcomes, and so it will never be evenly distributed because they're all gonna fit within those two possible outcome lines. Um, so that to say, we always have to calculate robust standard errors for our, uh, linear probability model. And if you recall, the way that we do that is we do the VCO HC, put our model in there, and we do the type being HC1, uh, and we'll just save that to our, um, uh, object, and then we calculate robust standard errors by taking the diagonal function of what we just saved, and then do the square root of it, and that becomes our robust standard errors. Uh, you'll need to do this in your lab. So just to reiterate, in order to get your robust standard errors to show, Excuse me, um, you have to do the SE argument, and then you'll create a list. So for your non-robust standard errors model, you can put null, and then you put your robust standard errors in there for your, um, uh, robust standard errors, uh, model. And sorry, those are both the same models, so you just structure them differently. You just remember which is which. Um, OK, let's go ahead and print our Outcomes. And right now, we just want to see the difference between what changed, uh, remember, the coefficients remain exactly the same, but the standard errors change, and therefore, the significance levels change. So let's do a quick glance and see what we're working with. Uh, average, or sorry, our constant didn't change at all, stays the same, that's expected work program. Um, no change. In significance there. We do see that the standard errors went from 0.0260 to 0.0263. So small changes, uh, no change, no significant changes for prior convictions. Nothing for time served, nothing for felony sentence, nothing for drug history, uh, black, married. Interesting. Uh, married went up just a hair, uh, but still not statistically significant. And then education, uh, still no statistical significance, age remained the same, and rule violations, after accounting for robust standard errors, actually are not statistically significant. So the number of rule violations does not seem to increase the probability or decrease the probability of re-arrest. Um, that is interesting. Robust standard errors can resolve the heteroscholasticity problem. They don't fix the other things that are wrong with LPM. And again, LPM is directionally helpful, um, but it is not the, you know, I guess you could say the gold standard. Uh, so, what are the other limitations? Unbounded predictions. Again, um, LPM does not constrain your probabilities to exist between 0 and 1. You could have a negative probability or a positive probability. Saying by constrained between 0 and 1 after going through these probabilities, we're saying that let's say we take a person who um Uh, hypothetically, let's say marriage was a, um, a decrease in probability, or let's say, uh, increase. Let's say, aside from marriage, all the other variables added up, and for this particular person, their, uh, probability was 90%, meaning there was a 90% chance they could be re-arrested. However, when we factor in marriage, and let's say that that was an uh uh increased uh it was statistically significant, and it had an increased probability of, I don't know, let's call it 25% um or 0.25%. If we took that person, had the flag for uh marriage turned on, that would take them from 90% to 115% uh probability of being, being re-arrested. And that doesn't make sense. Uh, when we're talking about each of these coefficients, the plus or minus, um, uh, isn't what we're talking about. We're talking about for the, uh, full outcome, what's the probability, uh, having a 115% overall probability of being re-arrested is, is meaningless. So we didn't necessarily see that here, but we didn't do all the calculations to get there. Just wanted to tie that knot. Um, that's one of the limitations of LPM unbounded predictions. It also assumes linearity, meaning that it assumes that it's the same constant slope for everybody, but, and it's not constrained between 0 and 1. It doesn't know how to stop at these, uh, and it doesn't fit the data in your typical probability curve, which is again where the S curve comes into play. So for those two reasons, I'm about. And, uh, Shark Tank fans, maybe. All right, that was dope. Uh, moving on. Now, let's look at the unboundedness problem here. Uh, if we're gonna use predict on our linear probability model, and we're just gonna produce a histogram. So I'm just wanting to see, of all the predicted outcomes, did any fall outside of the predicted or the, the typical probability bounds? So we have our 0 here, our 1 here. So these are the bounds that our GLM would stay within and that probability ought to stay within. And we can see, this is why I said at the beginning, it's not a bad model. I mean, at least for this data, like it's a pretty good indicator of um this data, and that's because this data is pretty well distributed. Um, but we do have some small cases where our model is predicting probabilities outside of 0 and 1. Very small volume, um, in terms of all the observations. Uh, sorry, my headphones died. I had to go and uh get some other headphones. Um, to wrap up where we were just at, so the, uh, linear probability model again, just as a demonstration, it doesn't stay within this. With our data, it's a generally good fit. Uh, our data is, uh, Pretty normally distributed. We have a small volume of observations or predictions, excuse me, that fall outside of the 0 to 1. In some cases, depending on your data, you may actually see some, some very skewed results where you have a lot outside of those bounds. Just as a reiteration as to one of the limitations of the linear probability model. Moving into why the logit model, uh, three main reasons. So the bounded predictions, again, the logit model stays within the 0 to 1 confines because of the S curve allowing it to constrain those possibilities. So our predictions are are confined between 0 and 1, so that's huge. Uh, second being non-linear relationships. The, uh, true relationship between, um, an effective X on the probability is not linear. Uh, it generally changes depending where in between you are, where your probability falls, so it's not a consistent slope. So, the nonlinear relationship ability of the logit model to do that S curve, the sigmoid curve, uh, enables our, um, and Allows our model to better capture the truth of our data, uh, again, with that S curve where the middle is going to be the most impactful in terms of the slope is more significant at that point, um, whereas on the tails, it flattens out if you recall from the earlier S curve we looked at. Uh, lastly is the approximation, uh, or sorry, the estimation used to create our estimates. The approximate appropriate estimation. Oh, forgive me, folks, uh, so the, um, ordinary least squares, that is the method that it uses, the maximum likelihood estimation is a different underlying mathematical mechanism that it uses to create our estimates, which is much better suited for the binary outcomes, uh, with logistic regression. So, uh, using GLM. We're going to use the family binomial argument. The model is exactly the same as our LM with the exception of those two. Add in the argument for family, change it to GLM instead of LM. Works great with Stargazer, and let's go ahead and print out our, pardon me, our results and let's see. Uh, first thing I'm gonna, uh, point out is this is once again in log odds. So, uh, not meaningful, not helpful. Uh, it tells us the significance levels, but, um, it's not meaningful as far as like, uh, uh, inference. Uh, I don't know how to take a log odds of 0.0153 for every additional month served and how that affects your overall probability, uh. So we have to convert that. So once again, it's in log odds. In log odds, it doesn't mean too much to us. The two things that I want to call out. Um, I think the lecture covers just briefly, but the, uh, in your, your normal LM model, you're gonna have, uh, R 2 and adjusted R2. Although not a perfect, uh, not perfectly synonymous, um, similar in how you can think about them, where log likelihood is going to represent how good your model fits, uh, how well it, um, uh, accounts for the variance in the, uh, outcome variable. So that's gonna end the closer to zero, the better. So, uh, it's always gonna be negative, but the closer to zero, the better. Your uh Akiiki inference criterion, the AIC, that's going to be more in line with your adjusted R2, which basically says the more complex your model is, you lose points because of it. So if you have a simple, um, highly effective model, you, uh, uh, will have a better adjusted R squared, same thing with an Akiki, uh, Akaiki, uh, information criterion. Um, so think about it in terms of that, uh, that's essentially what each of them are doing just with different, um, uh, scales. Sorry, I could not think of the word scales. All right, so let's go ahead and compare these two. So we have our original LPM model, uh, and then we have our logit model. Put them side by side. Um, small call out here. I'm just realizing this myself. Uh, the LPM model, it doesn't have the robust standard errors, so recall that we had a, uh, change in the linear probability model coefficients or significance, pardon me, after we ran robust standard errors, we didn't incorporate the standard errors into this output. It's not super necessary because we already went through it. This is again just for a general comparison between the linear probability model and the logit model which. We can't compare these, uh, they're, they're not comparable in their current form, um, so that's an important thing to distinguish the raw output of the logistic model, uh, is log odds. The raw output of the linear probability model is probability, and so these are not, um, comparable in their current form, but this we can see directionally you can see that they're very similar. Uh, the constant is statistically significant in the uh. Significant in the LPM model because it's statistically significant from zero, but otherwise you can see our coefficients, although the coefficients themselves are not similar because again they're different units, um, but the significance values are the same, uh, or very similar I should say 322,330,000 33 and boom, look at that uh call out here um. Robust standard errors we have to calculate for our linear probability model because it is heteroschodastic by nature. Uh, the GLM function, we do not have to do that. Um, and so our rule violation, if you recall from our linear probability model. Was statistically significant, significant initially, and then we ran robust standard errors on it and then it actually became statistically insignificant because it was up to the 0.1 level. Um, and so our GLM function already determined that, therefore, as a, just as a demonstration that we don't need robust standard errors for the GLM function. So interesting comparison there. All right, and I have a tendency to do this. So once again, um, I, I always, while we're looking at the coefficients, I explain it rather than scrolling down and just going along with the text. Either way, um, I already covered this. We do not, uh, we cannot compare these. We can compare the direction and significance of. All right. So once again, going back to interpreting the results, I overshot it there. Uh, I forgot that I included this little section, so, uh, forget if you saw that. Um, so let's interpret these, uh, we're gonna first convert to, um, odds ratios. So recall we have to exponentiate those. And in this process, you'll have to do this in your lab. Um, it's really important to also exponentiate the confidence intervals too, so you have a better idea of what is our 95% confidence range, um, uh, for odds ratios, and we'll, we'll talk a little bit more about that. So, let's go ahead and run this. Oh, there we go. Thought I overshot it and showed you guys the answer. Uh, so for the exponentiation, um, what we're doing here is we're saying I want to extract the confidence intervals from my login model and then the coefficients from my login model, and then I'm going to have my, um, column here for coefficients be the logit model, or sorry, the, the coefficients themselves. So again, you can see that on our output. Our column header is, um, the OR for odds ratios, and then this already pulls in our 2.5 and 97.5 headers. Uh, then we're gonna do a C bind, that's a column bind. So like a horizontal union, we're gonna uh horizontally stack these and then of those we're gonna exponentiate. It's important that if you want to look at your confidence intervals, you have to exponentiate those as well as your coefficients, um, or else you'll be looking at confidence intervals in, um, odds ratio, sorry, not odds ratios, log odds, while you're looking at your coefficients and odds ratios, and it just won't make sense. So remember to exponentiate all of it. Uh, so we can see here that for our odds ratios, callback to odds ratios, there are multiple, so it multiplies our pro our odds, not probability, it multiplies our odds, um, by whatever the coefficient is. Again, where odds, we don't actually know what the underlying odds are. Uh, so we're saying here that the, uh, Excuse me. The, uh, effect of an individual prior, so for every additional prior you would have, uh, you would expect your odds ratios to go up by 1.13, uh, we'll just call it 1.14. Um, and that's again a multiple saying that you would have an increase of approximately 14%, uh, in your odds for of being re-arrested. Uh, for every additional prior you have, and I say 14% because 1 times. 0.14, uh, the one is meaningless, so we can do a 14% increase or it's a 114% increase. And then we have our confidence interval saying that uh we're 95% confident that we would see results land somewhere for priors between 1.08 and 1.94. Uh, so the truth, we are 95% confident relie would lie somewhere within that range. Now, uh, recall odds ratios, so now we're on to the question that I already showed you the answer to, but I know you're, you're honorable students and you wouldn't, uh, have paused and gone back to look at that. Uh, so, question is, what are the constraints of odds ratios? Do you remember? What are their boundaries? I was supposed to do like a cool effect where it was like 5432, either way. For those that said 0 to infinity, congratulations, uh, unlimited high fives for y'all. So, 0 to infinity, um, and again, 1 is no change. The way that you can, uh, remember that is 1 times anything is that anything. Therefore, uh, uh, a multiple of 1 or an odds ratio of 1 is exactly what X would have been or the thing that you multiplied 1 by. So anything over 1 is an increase in odds. Uh, anything below 1 is going to be a decrease in odds, and that's going to be constrained though between 0 and 1. So, looking at these confidence intervals, one other thing I want to call out is, um, normally we would see confidence intervals and if we passed, uh, 0, if we crossed to 0, then we would say that it was not significant at the uh uh. Uh, 5% level. However, because one is our no effect boundary, now we're saying that um. Excuse me, uh, if it crosses one, our confidence intervals cross one, we can indicate that there is not a statistically significant effect. So let's look at one as an example, rules. The rules estimate and odds ratios is 1.058, indicating that, uh. For every rule you broke while incarcerated, your odds of being re-arrested within the observation window of our data would increase to the tune of about 6%, um, because again, I removed the 1 1.06X or 6% increase. in for rules. However, what I wanted to call, call out here is the range, the lower bounds is 0.9989, uh, upper bounds would be 1.12. Therefore, it crosses 1 and 1 is the insignificant or not, uh, no effect margin or point. And therefore, we, it's like we saw already, we are not 95% confident that the rules, the number of rules broken while incarcerated. Uh, affects your probability of re-arrest, at least statistically significantly. Um, cool. So we talked about work program, oh sorry, we talked about rules. Um, let's just look at work program while we're at it. So, work program, oh, I think we already did that, sorry. We did. Uh, the, the, the, the alcohol, we'll skip that one for now. We already covered it because I went ahead and talked about rules. Um, again, the bottom line here being that they're not super meaningful for realistic inference. It's a multiple, but what we're multiplying by, we don't know, so it, it's not super helpful. Uh, moving into predicted probabilities, um. While odds ratios have their purpose, probabilities are super helpful and intuitive in telling, especially stakeholders, what uh does this treatment effect have on um passing the MCAT or getting a better SAT score or getting into law school, or uh reducing poverty, whatever it may be. Um. Probability is far more helpful and meaningful. So the first thing that I wanna go over with you is like I mentioned at the start, we're going to manually calculate the probability in your lab using the probability formula. This is to help set you up with it. Super important, uh, you will not get points for it if you use predict on this question. There are two questions, if I'm, if I remember correctly, that ask you, that you're OK to use to predict. One explicitly says, use the probability formula. This is where you will use the probability formula. So, the probability formula, once again, is what is the probability that Y happens in our case, that re-arrest occurs, uh, and that's uh calculated by saying 1/1 plus uh the exponentiated value of -1 times our model. So, let's say first that we want to calculate the probability for the average individual. How we would go about doing that is calculating the mean for every coefficient. Um, this has more coefficients in, uh, the code through than your lab does, so you don't have as much, but it's gonna be the same arrangement. So, we're gonna say, what's the mean. Of our work program field, we're gonna save that to mean work program, same for prior, same for time served. So we're gonna extract the mean, save it to these objects, and then we're gonna, um, I just use Tibble, we haven't used it too much, but it's a nice clean opportunity, uh, or it's a, a great function, creates a nice clean output. So we're gonna say the average person at mean values for all variables. So I'm taking my Uh, I'm sorry, this is just to show you the, um, uh, averages. Let's run that, getting ahead of myself here. So we have the mean for the work program and, and, most of this we actually looked at earlier. Uh, so we have about 46, 47, if we're rounding up percent of people participate in a work program. Average number of priors is 1.43. Time served, uh, average is about 19 months. Um, 31% are felonies. Uh, alcohol is 21% of people had a, a history of alcohol abuse, etc. So we have all of those averages that we saw earlier when we did summary on our data set. And then what we're going to do now is extract our coefficients. So we're from our logit model because again we want to use the log odds for our probability formula. We don't want to use odds ratios, so we're going to extract our raw coefficients from the logit model. We're going to save them to B and remember that the subset number, it comes directly from the order that we put things in. So we're going to have the same order. That we used here be the same order that we use for extracting those coefficients. So we extract them all, save them to B, and then we're going to actually build out the model manually. So we have our constant, so that's beta 1, then we do beta 2 times mean working program, and then so on and so forth, and then we save that to our log odds average. And then we're gonna plug it into our actual probability formula, where again we take the negative of our, um, our model, exponentiate that. Plus 1 and then 1 over that value. So, let's go ahead and just run this bad boy and see what we're working with. So, the average person's probability to recidivate, to go back to jail after being released, is 37%. So your average um uh recidivism should be around 37% if you take the average of all of these. Um, one call out here, the, the average for somebody with drug history is weird because like your, your average is, uh, what did we say? 24%. So, you have 24% uh history of drug abuse. It's not super meaningful, again, we're taking the averages and some of these don't necessarily make sense. So there's arguments for um coding these in different ways in order to get like the discrete effect. So we can say, uh, rather than, I'm getting ahead of myself, forgive me, but just as a uh preface. Uh, we can do, rather than doing the average of mean drugs or the, uh, average of black, or the average of married, or average of mean alcohol, because again, these are binary, we can say, uh, what's the average of all of our other like continuous variables. So the average time served, the average number of priors, uh, average education. And then we can plug in hardcoded zeros or ones for these other ones, and then we can better approximate these discrete changes. So again, got ahead of myself a little bit. This manual method is what you'll need for one of your questions in the lab, so just be aware of that. Um, then what you should use in real life, any work you really do, and then the rest of the questions and the data in the lab, is you should use predict. Predict is going to be similar. You're going to create a data frame with the same types of variables, but instead of having to manually type out that probability formula, instead you're going to plug it into predict. So it's going to be predict the login model, object name you use. You're going to say new data, and we're going to call it average person. Um, and we're doing the same thing. We're, we're using predict to calculate the probability for the average person. Importantly, we're going to say the type equals response. And I'm sorry, new data average person, we save that to the average person object here. So let's go ahead and run this too. Excellent. And we went ahead and, uh, it would have popped it out in decimal form. We, uh, uh, um, to make it easy, uh, go ahead and scale it from the start, um, but just to notice there, um, both of these would technically when you run these show up in decimal form. I just went ahead and multiplied them by 1000 to get percentage, uh, it's cleaner in my opinion. And uh call out on the type equals response. We've used predict in previous modules. For this, you do have to include response, um, because that indicates that we're working with log odds, otherwise you're gonna get um some wonky numbers. All right, now, going back to discrete change, how do we calculate discrete change? What do we use, uh, uh, what do we use it for? Um, this goes back to what I mentioned before, where instead of saying the average of drug use, which is 25% of the population had a, uh, uh history of drug abuse. Great, but people don't have a 25%, like real people don't have a 25% history of drug abuse. Um, they either have a history of drug abuse or they don't. And so what we're gonna do now is we're gonna say, what is the impact on the average person. Uh, what is the impact of drug abuse or a history of drug abuse on recidivism for the average person. We're not doing it as depth, as in-depth as I had mentioned originally where you could like use multiple continuous variables to calculate your averages and then use different binary flags. We're gonna use the average for everything except for uh drug history and then um isolate the discrete response or the discrete change between the two. So first, average person, this is what we previously saved our data to where it's the mean of everything, but now we're gonna override, uh, so we're gonna save it to no drugs, and then we're gonna override drugs to be zero, so no history of drug abuse, everything else being average. And then the opposite, um, create a new data frame or a new object that has drugs, and then we're going to override that with a 1 indicating all of them have a history of drug abuse, and then we're going to calculate the 2 using the same predict function with the response and then their associated data frames, objects, and then we're going to calculate the difference between them. So the probability of re-arrest for somebody with no drug history is 35.29%, while the probability of re-arrest for somebody with a drug history is 43.07%. We can say that the discrete change or the effect of drug history or drug abuse history, it increases your probability of re-arrest by about 8%, 7.78%. Now, if we wanted to look at uh prior convictions, I say what is the, the number of prior convictions. Somebody with no prior convictions, excuse me, we, we're using um average prior convictions. I think I included an example where we use no prior convictions. Um. At any rate. So, we have this first, the average person, everything the same, and then we're gonna say for the average person, uh, again, the average number of prior convictions as well, which I think was one and change. Uh, and then we have the person with um higher. Convictions up at the 95th percentile, and we're gonna save all those to their respective data frames, quantile, you'll need this for your lab. Uh, quantile will allow you to find the percentile and then you just establish that as a second argument. You have your column you want to look at and then the percentile you want to look at. Then we put each of these in predict, subtract those so we can find the discrete change. So the 95th percentile for convictions, the number of prior convictions is 7. So this is uh the, the higher upper quadrant of people who use, uh, or who had prior convictions and who were released and observed. The average being 1.43. So a pretty big difference. And we can say the probability at the mean, so the average number of priors is 37.1%. And the probability for those with the 95th percentile of priors, so 7 percentiles, 7 priors, excuse me, is going to be 54.58%, giving us a discrete change of 17.47, uh, otherwise stated as having the 95th percentile of priors increases your probability of being re-arrested in the tune of 17.5%. All right, and we're almost done here, I promise. Uh, so now going to plotting the curve itself. You're gonna have to do this in your lab. Um, yours is going to look different than our data here. Uh, just wanna call this out from the start, even though the. GLM function, our login model will provide the opportunity for data to fit the S curve. It doesn't necessarily mean that your data will fit the S curve, as we already saw, our data is pretty normally distributed. In the case that we're about to see, our data does not complete, does not. Uh, fit an entire S curve. So all that to say, in working with different data sets, you might see that the S curve itself is not filled or your data doesn't look like the idyllic uh S curve. That's OK, that's normal. The S curve allows for the opportunity to fit the data, um, but it doesn't necessarily mean that it will because of limitations or restrictions in your data, or just the data itself doesn't fit it. Um, so we'll look through that as an example. So the first thing we're gonna do is create another data frame, um, and this we want to look at age. So we're looking to see at what different points, um, everything else average, uh, for age, how the probability changes at different points on the slopes, or sorry, on the curve. So we establish our data frame, we're taking the minimum value of age, and then we're finding the maximum value of age, and we're gonna go one month by one month using the sequence function. Um, so just one month by one month is going to be plotting our age. And that's important to note too is uh uh ages in months, once again. And then we're gonna use predict again, uh, we're gonna use our new data here, again, utilizing the range for age, and then response, and then we're gonna plot that where we have on our X-axis age and then our Y-axis, the predicted probability. So this is what I mean, we don't have the full S curve. Uh, the full S curve, but we can see the tail end of the S curve here. So, if you recall, our coefficient for age said that as you get older, you're less and less likely to be re-arrested. And so this is the tail end of our S curve where we can see the slope beginning to flatten out. And then our data is limited where we only have 200 months. So, about 200 months. Um, I don't recall what the minimum number of months was for age. Uh, it appears it is about 200. So our lowest number of months was 200, uh. So our data won't go any further past over here, uh, closer to like 0 or 1. Sorry, 1 month. Uh, but because we're limited on this and our probabilities fall right around 50% here, um, we just don't have data to fill the other end, uh, both because our probabilities are constricted. We have a lot of people getting arrested at younger ages, uh, and then we don't have anything younger than 200 months in order to continue the S curve over here. Even if we did, uh, um, it would probably be a little different. It wouldn't be the full S curve, I assume, but, um, at any rate. It obviously wouldn't make any sense to have a 1 month old plotted on here and their likelihood of re-arrest. It wouldn't have been arrested. Uh, so, but, um, this is again the lower end of the S curve. We can see right at the 0.5 though is where our slope is the, is the steepest. So somebody at 200 months of age, uh, that's about 16.5, has the highest chance of being re-arrested within our time window. Um. So, something to keep in mind there, uh, and then we can see it, somebody at 400 months, uh, what does that put us at, uh, 1630-ish, um. So it puts us at about 30, age 30, so their uh slope begins to lessen. So the effect of age on the probability of re-arrest is, uh, sorry, the, yeah, the probab the effect of age on probability is reduced as you get older, and it's capped out here because our lowest age is 200. All right, and for kicks and giggles, I, I paused for a moment. I adjusted our sequence to use uh data points that are outside of our, um, uh, out of our data set. So we set the lowest number of months to 1, so a 1 month old baby up to uh 1000 months, which. So that's somebody who's uh 83 up to 1000. So, a 1 month old up to an 83 year old. Um, the probability of arrest for uh a 1 month old based on this data set, uh, that's why using this, uh, changing the scale is very, um, it's not meaningful, but I wanted to show that as we added more, uh, values to the X axis, we can begin to see the S curve more or show up more. Uh, but the, uh, probability of re-arrest for, uh, a one month old is still at about 70%. Um, on that note, it's because we have a, a larger association with re-arrest happening with younger people, and so the. Model is saying a lot of the younger people are being arrested, therefore, the, uh, even if we were to go to an unreasonable number, it doesn't know that it's associating the the re-arrest rate uh with with younger age. And also importantly too, this is a 1 month old that has a uh recalling our earlier averages a 25% history of uh drug abuse. So this poor 1 month old, um, and they are, they've had a prior conviction. Um, etc. So, uh, based on the model, this is what it's saying we're putting in fake months, um, but because younger people are more associated with re-arrests, whether that's just because. Younger people have more opportunity, months in life to be re-arrested, uh, prefrontal cortex that hasn't been fully developed, um, whatever it may be, the model associates younger people with an increased probability of re-arrest. Uh, Either way, just wanted to show that we can get the S curve a little bit more in there, uh, if we expand our X-axis range. But if we don't have it, our model will fit the data to at least part of that S-shaped curve. Uh, either way, the X axis, or pardon me, the slope changes at different points, um, along the way. Now, we'll do this a second time and we're gonna go ahead and plot everything else average, but we're gonna change our priors, and we're gonna say, pardon me, uh, 0 priors, which is the minimum in our data set. Uh, I could have done min, uh, rescid priors, um, and then max rescid priors. So we're taking the full range of the number of priors, uh, by 1, and everything else being average, plug it into our model here, our predict model, and then we're gonna plot it the same way we did with age. There we go. And once again, we have an example, although, uh, uh, inverse, we have the part of the S-shaped curve, where, uh, now we're on the, we have the flip, excuse me, where it's a positive association rather than a negative association. So the more prior convictions you have, the more um Uh, the increased, the more your probability is, excuse me, of being re-arrested, which makes sense. Uh, we can see the slope changes though again as time goes on, where the slope. Excuse me, where the slope is always going to be steepest on the sigmoid curve at the probability of 50% or 0.5%. So, somebody who has 5, we'll call it 5, it's a little bit off, maybe 66 prior convictions. Every new or or or avoided prior conviction is going to be more significantly impactful to re-arrest compared to somebody who has 20 priors. Um, the change of going from 20 to 21 is much less than somebody down here who has 6 going to 7. Remember that the slope is always steepest when probability is 0.5. OK, now, moving into marginal effects, uh, and then we'll be wrapping this up. Thank you for bearing with me. Um, in the LPM, uh, the coefficient itself is the, uh, marginal effect. It's the probability, the change in probability. So once again, if we looked at the LPM we saw a coefficient for uh uh drug abuse um that said, 0.01, then that tells us that that having a history of drug abuse increases your probability by 10%. Uh, that's the, the marginal effect of, um, uh, the marginal effect being that plus or minus to our probability. So how do we get that with the logit model where the curved slope with the curved slope, so a 1 unit change in x in our sigmoid function, our logit model, produces a different result or a different effect compared to the LPM function where the effect is consistent across that line. Uh, now, how do we, uh, get that? We can utilize the margins package. The margins package is great. Uh, we can use margins on our login model. We're gonna just save it to the M, uh, to an object we call M, and then we're gonna use summary. And now this tells us the average marginal effect, which recall the average marginal effect is taking the marginal effect for every single row in our data set, and then it averages those effects across all of the data set, and that becomes our average marginal effect, which once again is the Uh, the general purpose inference, uh, for each variable. So, looking at age here, we have our average marginal effect being -0.0008. With a P value of zero, and this uh confidence intervals ranging from -0.0011 to -0.0006. Um. So we are highly confident that the average marginal effect, the plus or minus change in probability of re-arrest is reduced for every single month of age uh by 0.008%, or excuse me, move the decimal over twice, 0.08%. The average marginal effect for alcohol being 11.82% increase in probability, again this is plus or minus, um, 11.82% increase and plus in probability, excuse me, of being re-arrested, highly statistically significant, and we're 95% confident that the actual value would range somewhere between 5.75% and up to 17.9%. Uh, as far as its increase in probability of being re-arrested. So, uh, average marginal effect is a great general term, uh, to, to create that general impact, uh, but we can also be more specific in terms of, uh, using margin, uh, marginal effects, excuse me, to calculate like probability, the change in probability at a, uh, uh, specific situation, a point in time, um, or various characteristics. So let's say that we want to um uh Look at the marginal effect for somebody who is uh of age, excuse me, for somebody who is 20 versus 40 and see what that looks like. So we're gonna do the margins, uh, and then we use our model itself, so our original login model. You use at equals list and then you're gonna put in the values there that, oops, forgive me all, my mouse just died, one moment. All right, so, I'm back here with the new mouse. Um, all right, so going back to the, uh, function itself, so margins function, same function we used before, but now we're gonna be more specific. We identify the login model, so we're saying find the margins uh for the login model, but we're going to use at, which essentially is. Assigns a value to a variable, so it's the thing that we wanna look at. So, in our case, we're gonna say age, we want it to be 240, that's 240 months, so that's 20 years old. Uh, and then we're gonna say variables equal age, so the, uh Uh, the variables being the, the, uh, uh, variable we want to know the impact of. So for list again or add, excuse me, you can, uh, isolate the characteristics that you want to define, you can define your parameters. Variables is what tells you the, uh, or tells. The function, um, which impact we're wanting to measure. So once again, we're doing the same thing between these two, we're only changing the age. So again, what is the impact of age on probability of being re-arrested at 20 years old versus 40 years old. And again, we use our bind, this is combining rows or stacking rows. So, first, age 240, the average marginal effect is going to be 0.09, -0.09, highly statistically significant. Uh, similarly with uh age 48, is what it was? 40, excuse me, uh, quick math in my head. Um, similar results, highly statistically significant. The only difference is the average marginal effect is, uh, more for somebody who's 20 years old as opposed to somebody who is 40 years old. And if you recall from our, um, plotting of age against probability earlier, uh, the older you get, the less likely you are to, um, uh. Get re-arrested, excuse me. And that curve was much more sharp or the slope uh was sharper, uh, around probability equals 50%. Let's actually call back to this is priors, this is age. So if I'm 200 which months did we use? It's 240 months and 480 months. So at 480 months, we'll just say it's right about here, uh, we can see the slope is starting to flatten out a little bit there, but if we're over here at 240 months, it's a much steeper curve. And that tracks with the impact we saw, uh, marginally different, using margin here, at the 2.09 0.02% difference, uh, but in talking about months, it matches exactly what we saw in our our plot. So, let's do this with prior convictions now. Let's say that the prior convictions, um, or let's set the, the parameters for, uh, calculating or predicting the margins for those who um have one prior as opposed to those who have 8 priors. Again, our variable of outcome, or sorry, our, our, um, variable of interest, the impact we want to know about is priors, and then we're saying that the parameter is um setting priors to equal 1 and then priors to equal 8, comparing the difference between the two. So we can see both statistically significant, and we can see that the having one prior is for every. Pardon me, for having one prior, your, uh, instantaneous slope at that point of having one prior is uh, uh, we'll just go up 2.73% increase in probability. Having eight priors, your slope is changed, uh. To actually become more significant, a little different at the 2.85%, indicating that the impact of one additional or one less prior for somebody with eight priors is more impactful than somebody with one prior uh having one more or one less prior. The, the difference is slightly smaller for somebody with the one prior. And since we plotted our priors, we can see here, shoot, what were our numbers 1 and 8, we probably should have used some different values when we did this, actually. On the whim, let's see what our So these are actually close together, so we have 1 here, um, 8, you right about here, 8 being closer to the 50% probability, therefore the steepest point of the curve. Um, let's, uh, just for comparison, let's change that. Let's look at 8 and then somebody with 25. So let's say 8 is our lower bound, somebody right at the, right at the 50%, steepest curve, uh, steepest point, um. Of the curve And let's run that again. All right, so somebody with 8 prior convictions, that's somebody who is right at the about 50% probability, meaning the, uh, any change at that point in prior convictions is going to have a more drastic impact compared to somebody at the uh tail, where it's the slope is begin to flatten out. So somebody with 25 priors, going from 26 or uh. 25 to 26 or 25 to 24 is a much smaller impact, even less than half the impact. It's a 1.01% increase in the probability of re-arrest compared to somebody with eight priors having a 2.85% increase. So going from 8 to 9 really increases your chance of being re-arrested. Glad we got to do that. That was a good opportunity to see the difference there. All right. Now, to wrap this one up, this is just a heads up for your lab. Um, I had originally created a scenario, uh, with this data set to demonstrate or mirror, uh, the lab, but I, I decided to pull back on that, uh, and instead just give you a heads up and then let you, um, utilize your brainpower in the context of everything you've learned about logistic regression, uh, to tackle it on your own. Now, to wrap this all up and, uh, uh, to, uh, um, give you what you need for the lab. There is a question that asks you if you had to invest funds in one state or another. Which would you invest the funds in? And uh you would have to look at two marginal effects and say which one you think is best. I'm just gonna give you a heads up that the absolute value is the route to go. But I need you to justify in your answer why. Um, why does that matter and think about it in terms of the S curve, where these would fall and how a plus or minus, um, would be different. For each location because of where it falls on the S curve. Um, that's all I'm gonna give you for now. Uh, well, that's all I'm gonna give you. So, we'll see how you do on the, uh, the, the labs. Um, but keep that in mind. Thank you all for sticking around with me. This is a little longer than what I expected, but logistic regression is huge. Um, I, um, I think it's something that you will likely utilize a lot more than you might otherwise think right now, um, in, in your careers, in different analysis you do. Uh, I appreciate all your time. Thank you for a wonderful semester. Reach out if you need anything. Uh, if not, good luck on your final lab. Take care.