Hello students.  Welcome to your first code through for Module one interrupted time series.

By now you should have gone through the lecture materials and reviewed the lab instructions just to get an idea of what to expect.

This code through will demonstrate how to perform an interrupted time series.

We'll go through in RStudio and you'll also see the knitted file which is available in the module materials as well.

This video will have some additional content, notes, some advice, suggestions, things to consider that may not be available in the HTML the knitted file of this code through document.

So let's get started.

This week we're going to be utilizing the UK driver, UK driver deaths excuse me data set, which is available in R. You're more than welcome to of course do this yourself, add this type of code through to your portfolio of something you were able to complete in the program.

This here to get started is just going to be some basic styling.

You can disregard this or utilize this in your own work.

It's very helpful, adds a little stylistic approach, makes things cleaner, easier to read, more professionally done.

Now to give you, give you.

Excuse me, a rundown, the order of operations here for this code through is going to start by we're going to do the naive approach to an interrupted time series.

This is going to be our very basic outcome variable with our time treatment and time since variable.

And then we're going to go ahead and run that, interpret those coefficients much like you saw in the lecture materials.

Then we're going to.

This is one area that is not touched on very much in the original lecture materials, but it is very important when working with longitudinal data, which is why I've chosen to add this section here.

So you are aware going into the future you actually perform some time series analysis, how to both check for autocorrelation as well as how to adjust for it.

So we'll be running a Durbin Watson test and we'll be using the autocorrelation to visualize our autocorrelation across our time and our different lags, which is how the function works.

We'll adjust for the autocorrelation by re estimating our standard errors with the new west function.

And then we notice in our data, to preface what we'll be doing, we notice that there's seasonality trends throughout our data.

We'll see that as we plot it.

And in order to make a more robust model, we're going to introduce a control variable for seasonality and we're going to see how that affects our our coefficients, our significance levels for those coefficients.

And then once again, we will be doing the same autocorrelation tests.

For the Durbin Watson test, we're going to visualize the autocorrelation and then we will re estimate our standard errors once again after including that control variable.

After we've done all of that, then we're going to get into the counterfactuals, where we will be both looking at our actual outcomes as well as the counterfactuals, how we can calculate those, how we utilize the predict function, and then how we can both visualize and estimate what the program impact was using the counterfactuals at different points in time.

And then last, we are going to introduce how to incorporate a control group, which is going to be the bonus question section of the lab instructions.

So this will show you how to accomplish that, but also this will set the stage for our next week's module where we discuss difference in difference.

So once again, the data set we're using is available in R. It's just UK driver deaths.

It's data based on Great Britain, excuse me, over the time periods from January 1969 to December 1984 and in the month of, well, technically the very end of January 1983, January 31, 1983, 83, a seatbelt law went into effect.

We technically coded that as February 1983.

But the overall question we're wondering here is how did that law affect driver deaths?

Technically, it's casualties.

I believe that is more broad.

If we were to check the data a dictionary, I believe that's more than just deaths, I believe it's serious injuries.

Either way, that's going to be our outcome variable.

Simply the total number of road casualties.

And once again, the data, excuse me, the intervention occurred in February 1983.  That's how we code it.

But it was technically January 31, 1983.

And then for reference, that's time equals 170 and then the time frame we've already discussed here now the following section.

It's simply for the purpose of trying to parallel the lab instructions and how they start.

For simplicity, not to become confusing, I wanted to show you the code through essentially as if you were working through your lab instructions.

So the next few code chunks are just to introduce you to the base data or how it comes for the UK driver deaths data set.

And then we will manipulate that data to where we end up getting the same starting point we have with our lab instruction.

So a lot of this is unnecessary except for that purpose.

If you were just doing this on your own you would not need the following steps.

So first, to easily load the data, let me actually make sure I have everything loaded here.

All right.  Forgive me.

I went ahead and paused the video for a second so I could just clear all the output so we can go through it together and see it.

So let's make sure that all of our packages are loaded.

If you don't have these packages, you are able to simply download them or, excuse me, install them.

You'll see here.  I am actually missing two of the potential install packages, but I already have them in case you wanted to go through and do something similar.

You'll want to make sure that you both install the packages and use library to load them.

One thing that I actually prefer to do rather than the install packages is come to the package section here.

Install, type in the one you're looking for.

Find it, click install.

You can do it that way.

Either way it performs the same function.

So we've got our data sets loaded.

I believe I ran it.

Let's go ahead and do it for good measure.

Okay, and now we load in the data set with the data UK driver deaths, and then we're going to go ahead and both look at the class.

So what type of data this table is stored in or this data is stored in.

And we're going to see what that data looks like.

So the TS here, this is our class.

The UK driver deaths is stored in a time series format.

What that basically is is your observations here have both a column header, the months, and then a row header that's going to be your year.

So it's a matrix of sorts where you have 1969, January.

Your total casualties was 1687, February 1969, 1508.

That's how our data is stored.

Now, again, these next steps are just to get that data to look like our lab instruction starting point.

So the first thing that we want to do is we want to extract just the casualty values from this.

And the way we can do that is we can simply say as a new.  As a numeric.

We're going to pull from the data set and we're going to store it as a vector into object V. So let's go ahead and run that.  Print it.  There we go.

We have everything listed out the lab instructions.

The way that it starts is it has a simple list saved to a vector.

So we're going to go ahead and take this.

We're going to remove the white space between each value and instead replace it with a comma with white space.

That's what this paste and collapse is doing here.

So let's run that.

And now we have the list that we would otherwise use.

So you just copy paste that in here into this function and save it to our new object D, which is going to stand for data.

So now we have the starting point of our lab instructions, which utilizes passengers to start from here.

And now we need to go ahead and create our variables.

So once again, in our interrupted time series model, we have our outcome variable, we have our time variable, we have treatment, which is the flag zero for the pre treatment, one for the post treatment periods.

And then we have our time, since which we will actually be talking about in this because there's a very important caveat and it differs from the majority of what the lecture showed, but it's an important concept in econometrics that you need to understand to make sure you're properly isolating the impact in your treatment and time sense variables.

Okay, so the first variable we want to create, and forgive me, first we need to save our data not as a vector, but as a data frame.

And we're going to put all of the values we just saved to the vector D and we're going to go ahead and save that as the column depths.

And we're once again going to overwrite D. So our data frame we're working with is D. And we're going to look at the first few.

So we can see here we have our row numbers which always appear when you're working with the data frame.

If you're working with a tibble, you wouldn't see these.

And then we have our list of deaths.

So January 19th, I've already forgot the first year.

69, that's our first value.

And then so on and so forth.

Okay, so we've created our deaths columns.

So this is our passengers, as we would have seen in the lab, the lab instructions, except now we have it as deaths, because that's what we're looking at.

Now we need to create our time variable.

And remember, time is simply just counting up.

It's basically a cumulative sum of our, forgive me, not a cumulative sum.

It is simply a row number for the number of observations within our data set.

So in our case, our data set, we have 192 different months being observed in our data set.

Remember, it's on the month year level, so 192observations.

So we just want to code that as what our row number is actually already doing here.

But we want to create a column specifically for it.

So we will do one through the length of death.

So it's going to count 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

All the way up to 192, which is the max number within our data set.

So let's go ahead and look at the top five and the bottom five.

We can see 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.

And then the last ones, the last five, bringing us to 192.

So now we've created our time variable and now we need to create a treatment variable.

So treatment variable.

Remember our treatment occurred at time period 170.

So at time equals 170.

I had done this previously to figure out what that worked out to be.

So it's time equals 170.

So we want to code anything on or after time equals 170 should be coded as post treatment.

And then anything prior to would be coded as pre treatment.

That would be zero for our dummy flag here.

So we use the if else if time is greater than or equal to 170, our treatment time, then 1, otherwise 0.

And let's go ahead and look at both the beginning, middle and end so we can see when our treatment starts to turn on.

We have our time, our deaths, and now our treatment zero up until the point of intervention at 170.

And then it continues one until the very end.

Now we have our treatment variable figured out.

Quick little note.  This is the really important thing that I want you to understand in many points.

I believe it's two points in the lecture materials.

It codes the.

It codes the time since our p value here in our time series model section and I believe it mentions it in one other spot.

Perhaps it was the tobacco consumption example.

At the point of intervention, treatment turns on and time since clock starts or counter starts.

This is not the way that in virtually all econometric standards you would do it.

You would code this as zero at the time of treatment as to not modify your time since variable to incorporate your treatment.

The way this would work is this one would count as our time since and so our time since would actually be affected by our treatment variable.

So our treatment coefficient is going to be impacting our time since coefficient to whatever extent the effect of treatment is heavy.

So hypothetically, let's say that we had a weak time since coefficient, but we realistically we had a weak time since coefficient, but we had a very strong treatment because treatment starts and time since is counting that that's going to inflate our time since coefficient.

When in reality we want to isolate treatment for our immediate effect to represent just that immediate Effect and then time since should represent the time after.

So very important note in our code through and in your homework, your lab instructions, it is expected that your time since coefficient will be zero at the time of intervention and then count up from then on treatment starts.

Time since doesn't until the time period or the observation after in your instructions for your example of your lab, these are daily observations for bus ridership throughout a single year.

And so this would be.  I can't remember.

Your treatment goes into effect on day 121.

Your time since should be 1 on day 122 and 0 on day 121.

If you have questions, of course, please post in the class discussion thread.

But very important and hopefully that gave you an insight into why we do it the way that I'm telling you here.

So in order to accomplish this, I did a two step process that I thought was pretty simple and straightforward.

But you may prefer a different process.

I do ask, as you note at the beginning of our lab instructions, that you do follow the same kind of coding conventions I use within the that we use in the lecture and that I'm using in the code through.

It's very important to make sure the students are learning and this is a way that are learning the methods we're teaching and this is a way that we ask you to do such.

So the start is we use the cumulative sum function on our treatment variable and we save that to a time since.

Now, if you're not familiar with cumulative sum, what it does is it says look at this row in row in the.

Excuse me, in this column in treatment I'm going to count all here.

Let's pull it up this way.

So in treatment I'm going to go row by row and I'm going to add up what is from this row and then to the next row.

So I'm going to add zero plus zero plus zero plus zero and it's going to be zero plus zero is zero, therefore zero.

Zero plus zero zero, therefore zero.

Until we get to the point where we get to our treatment and we're going to say okay, zero plus one is one.

So technically the first step of this is going to code our timesense column the way I just told you not to do.

But we have a second step to adjust for that.

But it's going to say zero plus one is one.

Therefore in this new column we just built in the same corresponding row, we're going to have one and then we're going to add the value in the next Treatment row.

And we're going to say one plus one is two plus one is three, and then so on.

So let's see what that looks like.

Run just this first.

Come back here.  So once Again, TimeSense remains 0 throughout up until we get to our treatment variable.

Because again, we're looking at treatment, we're saying what's in treatment?

Then I'm going to add what was in my time since row just before the treatment turned on here.

And we're going to go whatever this value is, plus this value goes into this cell here.

So 1 plus 1 is 2, 2 plus 1 is 3, 3 plus 1 is 4, and so on and so on.

So now we've got our time sense values in here, but we need to just subtract one from everything because again, we want this to be zero at the time of treatment.

So the way that I opted to do this was simply do another if else.

And we're saying if the time sense value is greater than or equal to one, then we're going to subtract one from whatever is in that.  In that cell.

Otherwise we're just going to put in the timesense value, which this is just zero.

So basically it's saying if timesense is zero, keep the zero, otherwise subtract one from whatever is in that value.

So let's run that once again.

And now we can see we have our zeros up until treatment and then at the point of treatment.

Now what used to be one is zero.

And then now our time since actually starts the day after treatment occurs.

So it's really counting the time since treatment.

So it's been one day since treatment, two days since treatment, technically one month since treatment, two months sincere, three months in treatment, and so on and so forth.

So now we have our variables set up.

Let's take a quick look at the beginning right around treatment and then the end.

So we have our time value, a row number, going throughout.

And once again, it just matches whatever the data frame row number is here, because that's ultimately what it is, treatment.

You see, it turns on and stays on.

Time since stays off until the period after treatment, and then it counts up from there to where we get to 22 at the very end.

Now we have our three variables set up.

So let's look at some summary statistics here.

So we have our deaths.

We have the values of the deaths.

The max amount of casualties we experience in one single period is 2,654 time.

We know that our minimum is 1 because we start at 1, and then we have 192 time observations or different observations.

So we have 192 as our max.

That all makes sense.

Our treatment is a treatment dummy flag, so we should have 0 and 1 only so we know our min is 0.

Our max is 1.

That makes sense.

Our time since we know we have 22 post treatment observations.

So 22 makes sense.

A minimum of zero.

That makes sense.

Now you're also asked to plot your trends and so you can do that simply you can add in some additional things.

I believe the question specifically asks you to really just plot time and death and then also include a line indicating when the treatment or intervention occurred.

So you don't have to worry about all the extra stuff here.

You can really just do your X axis, your Y axis and then add in your line.

Anything else is just nice formatting.

But you don't have to do that for the lab question.

And now we have when our law went into effect and our casualties plotted over time.

And we started in January so we can sort of get an idea of where things land.

Interesting to see.  As I mentioned before, we know that there's some cyclical patterns throughout and so that is a very interesting thing to observe here.

And we'll see how that is affecting our results later on.

And just looking at it, visually speaking, it looks like though we were having a decrease in casualties right when the intervention hit and then a continued decrease.

And it does seem like there was a noticeable reduction.

Like the average, the average rate dropped almost as if what we saw here, we had a drop that sort of stayed lower than it was previously.

Anywho, visually observing it, making note of what we can see, helpful to get things started.

Now let's go ahead and set up and run our model.

And a couple important notes is this section here.

It's the reminded.

Excuse me, you're reminded within the lab to include this section.

Results = as is.

This allows us to, when we change our type to HTML, to have a very nicely formatted Stargazer table in our final output.

If you were to not include this, it would simply produce the result in HTML code.

So it's not easy to read.

So super important.  Long story short, make sure you put in results equal as is, just like this in your code chunk.

Wherever you print a Stargazer table.

And then when you're working in your rmd, when you're actually doing the lab, make sure this is text so you can easily interpret what you're seeing.

But then before you submit your lab, before you do a final knit and submit it make sure that this is HTML and so you get a very nice and clean formatted table at the end.

So we build our model, we have deaths as our outcome, time, treatment and time since.

And again we saved our data to a data frame D. So we're going to use that all in the LM function and we're just going to save it to its for interrupted time series.

And we go ahead and print that using Stargazer where we put in our object we wanted to print.

I moved this to text so we can see it.

One other important thing is you do not have to include these additional functions.

I recommend doing at minimum digits and you have to use type and then of course your object.

But dependent variable labels, column labels, covariate labels, these are not required and frankly sometimes they can.

You can do them out of order and then you misinterpret your results.

So feel free to experiment with these.

But just know that if you do your covariate labels, they have to match the order that you put your labels in.

So time, time is first here.

Time is first in our model treatment is second in our model treatment is second in our covariate labels, time since and then time since and so on.

One final important note is there is an option to do intercept dot bottom equals false.

And that would ultimately move our intercept that typically would be at the bottom to the top.

Very important though, that then would mean that these are not in the correct order anymore.

So my recommendation is to not include intercept dot bottom equals false, especially if you're doing covariate labels because then you can actually mislabel your coefficients and get completely wrong interpretations.

Tangent over.  Let's go ahead and run this and see what our output looks like.

So we have our four coefficients we're looking at.

Let's start with the constant being intercept.

As a reminder, the intercept represents what are in this case average casualties would be when all other variables are zero.

So in this case this would be the time equals zero, Treatment equals zero, timesense equals zero, of course.

So really we're looking at the average casualties before our data set started and now it's significantly, pardon me, it is highly statistically significant at the.01 level and that is because it is different from zero.

Your constants, if they're different from zero, you will have a very high significance.

Now, starting from the top down, going with the rest, first we have time.

Time once again represents our pre intervention trend or our pre intervention slope.

This tells us that prior to the intervention there was already a negative slope Meaning that for every single month that went by, there was a reduction of approximately 1.56.

We can round up and call it 2 or 1 to 2.

We can say less casualties per month as time went on.

So we already know that for whatever reason there was a negative pre intervention trend happening.

Prior to the seatbelt law, and that is statistically significant at the 0.01 level.  2.

Now we have our treatment effect, which again is our immediate effect.

What effect did we see immediately at the time of intervention?

Technically, in this case, the month following intervention intervention occurred on January 31st of 1963.

If I'm remembering the year correctly, we're looking at February, which is when we coded it for.

So we noticed an immediate drop in casualties after the law went into effect, and that is in the tune of 457, 458 less casualties that month.

And we see that there it was highly statistically significant at the 0.01 level.

And now very important times since, this tends to be where students do get mixed up, especially when it comes to the lab instructions.

And interpreting this coefficient, time since represents not the post intervention trend or the post intervention slope, but instead time since represents the change to the pre intervention slope in the post intervention period.

So in this case our sustained effect is representative 19.2.

And this means that the slope changed from the pre intervention period to the post intervention period by an additional 19.2 casualties per month.

So we had a, a recurring drop in our slope and then we had a huge drop at the time of treatment.

And then we noticed that the treatment actually started increasing.

Excuse me, the casualties.

The rate of casualties per month started increasing by about 19 compared to what it was before, negative 1.56.

So if we want to find our post intervention slope, we need to add negative 1 point, oops, 1.56 plus our time since coefficient, which is representative of our change to that slope after intervention.

Our post intervention slope would actually be 17.64.

So after treatment, the rate of casualties began increasing by about 17 or 18 additional casualties per month.

And again, this is statistically significant at the 0.05 level, which is still going to be considered statistically significant for all of our, all of our labs.

If it's at the.05 level, it is considered statistically significant.

All right, so we already went through and we interpreted that.

So this is, we just went through all this.

You can review this though, if you choose to read.

Read through this at another time.

And once again, just to recap, you can see here that we are calculating our post intervention slope and how we have to add those together to find the actual slope.

The time since simply represents the change to the pre intervention slope in the post intervention period.

Now, one of the questions you have in the lab instructions, it asks you about what are some of the explanations for why we would expect to see or why it would not be absolutely abnormal to see the time since coefficient begin to increase the way that we saw it, if we see the seatbelt law had an immediate effect to the tune of 450, 400 or so, 458 or so less casualties, why would we see an increase in our time since coefficient?

And so a couple potential things to think about here and this is something to be cognizant of as as you do your own evaluations as you consider data going forward.

The seat belt law, unlike the example found in our lecture at the very beginning that describes a tobacco tax, they would roll out and impact people very differently.

So as an example in the lecture it described the tobacco consumption was our outcome variable and tobacco tax as our intervention.

The world of tobacco consumption Folks who consume tobacco generally purchase the tobacco products on a relatively frequent basis.

The pain of a tobacco tax would be felt and would be felt fairly quickly.

Like we wouldn't think of a of a lag in terms of there being a lag, that it would take time to impact people and therefore to see an effect of tobacco reduction rates or to assume given a certain amount of time it would be a short term, short term delay before a tobacco consumption tax would impact people who consume tobacco and therefore then they would decide do they want to stop consuming tobacco or reduce the rate at which they consume tobacco or not change at all or increase so that pain would be felt quicker in the example of an intervention like a tobacco tax.

Now to flip that in the case of a seatbelt law, whereas there wasn't a seatbelt law before, it's arguable that people may not adapt or pick up on wearing a seatbelt as fast.

There could be many other confounding factors as part of this, but perhaps at the beginning a way to possibly explain this data is that at the time of treatment when the seat belt law rolled out, people were highly scared of getting tickets or being penalized for not wearing a seatbelt.

We don't have that in this data.

But perhaps that was a reason that caused people to pick up on that quickly and the reason that it dropped off is maybe people realized that there wasn't a risk they weren't getting Any tickets.

They hadn't heard about people getting tickets.

So over time people were like, oh well, I don't need to wear a seatbelt because I'm not going to get a ticket.

Assuming that was a big driver for why people wanted to wear a seat belt immediately.

Hence the immediate effect we see as opposed to over time not wearing it.

And therefore casualties increased.

So between those two, the behavioral adaptation, it could take time for people to pick up on it.

That's one reason why we could see an increase or really the, the initial scare of the tickets and then realizing that maybe it's not a risk to get a ticket and so therefore they increase it.

Perhaps it's also that they were wearing their seat belts and then they began driving more risky because they thought they were safer and therefore there was more casualties.

So a couple potential things also it could be seasonal influences, which we've already preface that we will be discussing or that we will be controlling for.

We notice seasonal trends.

So maybe that we just really haven't captured seasonal trends in our model.

And really what we saw in the immediate effect was more so just a seasonal trend.

And we just happened to roll out a lot at that time.

And the way our model works is it just overinflated our immediate effect because it's seeing some of the natural seasonal trends already.

And then we notice the increase because over time it returns to that normal.

And then regression to the mean is the same thing.

If we see that big drop, there tends to be this, this phenomenon where things tend to fluctuate back towards that, that general average.

So those are potential possibilities in this particular scenario that could explain why we saw an increase in our time since or why we saw an increase in our post intervention trend.

Now, super important autocorrelation is something that whenever you're working with longitudinal data, you will virtually always suspect it and see it.

To not see autocorrelation in longitudinal data is highly abnormal.

And so it is always critical to assume it's there, test for it and adjust for it.

So we know that in regression models we have an assumption that our errors are independent.

We can plot this too by simply doing residuals function on our saved model.

That's pulling the residuals from this model.

And then we can plot those residuals.

We can see here this is what our plotted residuals look like.

And then we just go ahead and add this line here in order to get a better idea visually of any kind of pattern.

So once again, if we notice patterns in our residuals, that could be an indicator of two things, autocorrelation or heteroscal.

Both of which mean that it means that there are steps we need to take.

In this particular instance we're going to be looking at autocorrelation.

So the first thing we want to do is simply just look at our plotted residuals and we should see if there is any discernible patterns, if there is total randomness or any discernible patterns.

And just looking at our data here, we can see that there is sort of a ebbing and flowing of the residuals.

We can see here that it starts off much wider, gets narrow here, gets a wider here, narrow here, a little bit wider here, narrow here, which is not.

We can't confidently say just by looking at this that there is heteroskedasticity or if there is autocorrelation.

But that pattern is something to be concerned about that we want to check further.

4 and we can also see almost a fanning effect where we have very narrow on this end here on the right, and then it's pretty wide to start here.

And that can be indicative of heteroscedasticity, which we actually talk more about that in future modules.

So we always will suspect that there is autocorrelation.

So, as you noticed in the lecture, we will be using a couple of tests.

So first is the German Watson test.  Pardon me.

And this is found in the LM test package.

And we installed that earlier, loaded it up, now it's simply just DW test inside.

Excuse me, with our saved model inside.

And what this is going to tell us, it'll give us the actual score which this ranges from 0 to 4.

2 being that there's no autocorrelation closer to 0, closer to 4 means that there's autocorrelation correlation.

4 would put us more in the tune of or gravitating towards 4 puts us more towards negative autocorrelation.

0 puts us towards non negative autocorrelation.

We get our P value, which in this case is significantly less than zero, just by looking at it.

So the way to interpret this is our null hypothesis for this test is going to be that there's no autocorrelation in the residuals, meaning that our assumption that the errors are independent holds true.

However, the if our P value is less than 0.05, then that means that our residuals have autocorrelation in them and we have to reject the null.

So once again, the P value in this case is less than 0.05, so we do reject the null.

Therefore we do have significant autocorrelation in our residuals.

And that means that we should continue to take further action.

Now, the second thing we talked about inside of the lecture is how to utilize the ACF function, our autocorrelation function.

We do the same thing.

We do residuals autocorrelation function.

In this case, we just gave it a title and we can see here our chart.

To recap the.

I won't go into too much detail, but the autocorrelation function is it basically performs a lag where it looks at one period, it looks at the previous period, correlates those values, and then it goes multiple lags back.

So it'll do two lags back, three lags back, four lags back.

In this case, I believe it's 22 lags here we've gotten to.

And it'll look at each of those and it'll check the correlation.

And then if the correlation is higher than the blue lines, this is our confidence intervals here.

If we pass the confidence intervals, then that means that we have in those lags statistically significant autocorrelation.

And interestingly enough, just like we saw patterns in our normal data, we can see here there's a clear cycle and as well as significant autocorrelation in many of these different lags.

So it's very clear that we do have quite a bit of autocorrelation within our data, which leads us to want, leads us to want to adjust for that.

And, and if you recall from the data, we do that by utilizing robust standard errors.

This is the New west method.

And so we do this by performing a couple of steps.

We utilize New west on our saved object and then this function here, it's called diagonal.

Not going to go into how it works.

You can look into that on your own.

And then we do the square root of that and we're going to save that to our robust standard errors in this situation.

Now, Stargazer again is really cool, especially if you want to compare multiple models against each other in a nice clean, easy read format.

As a reminder, make sure you include results equal as is in your header here.

And then we also have our type in this case.

I knitted this previously, so I need to move this back to text.

And in our Stargazer function, we're using the same model twice.

But what we're doing is changing.

We have our standard errors and we're simply going to list null.

So for our first model, it's not going to be, it's not going to be using the standard errors in our second model It'll be referencing that.

Therefore our confidence intervals are going to be.

Our confidence intervals.

Excuse me, our significance levels are going to be adjusted based on that.

So let's go ahead and load this up and we can see a side by side.

Here is our original model with the coefficients being the same as well as the significance levels being the same.

Everything as we previously looked at.

Now we move over to our robust standard errors and what do we see?

We see our significant levels drop quite a bit to the 0.1 level where before it was the 0.01 level.

Meaning that this is not something we would consider statistically significant any longer.

So the negative trend that we thought previously with non robust standard errors was statistically significant.

Forgive me, sorry.  The what we thought was a negative trend and statistically significant turns out that when we account for robust standard errors we were over inflating this estimate and or the the significance level.

And realistically we cannot confidently say that there was a negative trend in the pre intervention slope with treatment.

What we thought was highly statistically significant turns out it's not when we account for robust standard errors.

So we cannot at this point say that there is an immediate effect of treatment based on our current model time since same thing used to be significant at the 0.05 level.

And we lose significance once we account for robust standard errors.

So at this point, just on this current model with no additional control variables, the naive model does not demonstrate that the law had any short term or long term effect.

So very important for this.

Now this section here just recaps what we just talked about.

Now we've noticed that there is again ebbs and flows in our data.

We saw it in the originally plotted values, we see it in some residuals.

We know that there's autocorrelation.

Let's go ahead and try and redo our model by factoring in something that we seem to see is a low hanging fruit.  Seasonality.

Seasonality is almost certainly affecting our results.

So let's go ahead and incorporate this control and let's see how our results play out, how our coefficients change.

So it's going to be the same exact model with the exception we need to add in a new column for seasonality.  In this case.

The way we're going to do that is we know our data starts with January, goes through December and it actually has an even number of years.

So we're going to go ahead and create a column that's going to be 1 through 12 and it's going to repeat.

So it's going to go 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12, start again at 1 1,2,3,4,.

5,6,7,8, 9,10,11,12, etc.

Through the entire length of our data set.

D and then we're going to turn that into a factor.

Remember, factor is how R basically will group something.

And so we're going to make sure that we turn that into a factor so R recognizes that that is a, those are individual groups.

And then we're going to go ahead and add that into our model.

We'll learn more about with a negative one here when we get into module three when we discuss fixed effects.

This is a way to tell R that instead of having a intercept for instead of dropping a single reference group, in this case January because it would be the first one, and using that as our intercept and then all other coefficients for the groups will be changes to or differences from January, this negative one here simply gives every single group its own intercept.

This will make more sense once we get to fixed effects.

So I won't bother with it too much now.

If you have questions now, feel free to ask about it.

But you don't need to worry yourselves too much with what that negative one does.

It just gives every single month its own intercept.

And then we're going to go ahead and do Stargazer once again, change that to text for the purposes of this code through.

Okay, so let's see.

So once we account for seasonality, we see that we do still have a negative and statistically significant pre intervention slope.

So about 1.8.

We'll just round up to 2, 2 less casualties per month throughout our data set.

Is our trend and our treatment still statistically significant, but it has been reduced by approximately 150160 casualties.

So a huge drop compared to what our naive model consisted of.

But statistically significant and that's valuable.

And now time, since importantly in this case is not statistically significant, but it does show that there was a change in the slope after intervention that actually made the slope grow.

So the slope went from negative 1.78 to whatever the total of 1.78 and 6.87 was puts us in the tune of 5ish if I'm doing my math quick there.

So a positive slope after intervention, but again not statistically significant.

As mentioned before, that negative one simply gives every single month its own intercept.

Whereas before if we didn't include the negative one, we wouldn't see month one, which would be January.

Instead we would just see a single constant which would represent January and then month, 2, 3, 4, etc.

Their coefficient values would be would represent the change between January and February.

So let's say January is 1873, month two is February.

It's approximately 180 or so less than January.

So month two without the negative one would actually just be that negative 180.

So it just shows you the change from the intercept.

We'll get into it more again, but that's what that means.

So now let's still check.

We know it's longitudinal data even though we included seasonality.

We can't rule out just by including seasonality autocorrelation.

So let's go ahead and run the same test.

Let's run our DW test here and let's see where we're at.

Remember once again that our null hypothesis is that there is no autocorrelation.

Our alternative hypothesis is that there is autocorrelation.

And so in this case, once again we have our p value is much less than 0.05, which tells us that we do have autocorrelation still within our model.

And we can see once again the score here would go from 0 to 4.

2 being no autocorrelation.

In this case we have 0.9, another indication of the amount of autocorrelation we have.

So we know we have autocorrelation.

Let's go ahead and run our robust standard errors.

Same thing, except for changing our model to be the seasonal model.

We just saved it to here.  There we go.

Saved it to its underscore seasonal.

And then we're going to put them next to each other again just like we had done previously with our naive models.

And we're going to see how our robust standard errors affects our significance levels.

Okay, we're looking good.

So wonderfully we have maintained our significance level for both time and treatment.

And interestingly not what we would typically expect.

But for the purposes of this code through in this module we will suffice.

Our robust standard errors have actually estimated our impact to be greater than what we had previously accounted for without calculating robust standard errors.

And our time since is highly statistically significant.

And so in this case, all of our coefficients in our model with controlling seasonality are statistically significant, indicating that there is a pre intervention negative trend in the tune of negative 2 casualties per month at the time of treatment.

Even controlling for seasonality, we had approximately 301 less casualties.

And then after intervention we noticed an uptick in our slope.

It grew to the tune of 7.6.871 casualties per month as time went on.

And this could be again regression to the mean.

Any of those previous explanations we discussed with the exception of seasonality which we are now controlling for.

So wonderful we know that at this point we can estimate, we can infer that the seat belt law did have an effect and there was also an increase in the post interventions trend after the seatbelt law went into effect.

And once again this is simply describing everything that we had discussed.

And in case I hadn't actually explicitly mentioned it, it is important to note, like I mentioned on the DW test, it can range from 0 to 4, 0 being positive autocorrelation and the 4 representing a negative autocorrelation.

So autocorrelation can affect our standard errors in either direction, which is also possibly why we see our time since variable tick up to a higher, excuse me, to become statistically significant after recalculating with standard robust standard errors.

So either way, just important to know it doesn't only affect it in one direction, it can affect it in both directions.  Directions.

So now we've run our model, our naive model.

We've checked for autocorrelation, we've adjusted for autocorrelation, and in order to improve our model we included a new control variable to account for seasonality.

And we did the same steps of checking autocorrelation and then adjusting for it with robust standard errors.

We've come a long way.

Now let's get into our counterfactuals once again.

The counterfactual is what would have happened had our intervention not occurred.

So we can't know that for sure, but we can utilize our model and we can predict what the counterfactual would have looked like at that time and compare it against what our actual output is.

So the counterfactual having not occurred means that our treatment at our time since would be zero, leaving us with only our outcome variable, our intercept and then our time variable.

And now the counterfactual will vary over time because we have a pre intervention slope.

So as time goes on, our outcome changes.

So our casualties changed over time.

As we saw earlier, when we plotted it out, we had a pre intervention trend and we can see that every different point in time, your counterfactual arcs and your casualties vary.

So when we're looking for a counterfactual, if we maintain the same pre intervention slightly slope and look at different points in time, we're going to be calculating a different counterfactual because as every point of time, every observation part of me goes, there are different actual predicted outcomes for our counterfactual.

So let's go ahead and get into calculating those counterfactuals.

The first thing that you're going to be asked to do is to first find the actual value in our data set.

Because our data set contains the data from an actual where the treatment occurred.

So we're going to use the real outcome, which is when the treatment occurred, and we're going to compare it against the predicted outcome.

So don't use predict in this section.

That will give you the fitted value, not the actual value.

So we have here we're going to say we're going to subset time period 182 which is going to be 12 months after our data set.

And we're going to save that to deaths 182.

And we're simply going to add this paste just to make it a cleaner output.

And we're going to say that 12 months after treatment in February 1984, there was 1165 casualties.

Now we want to use the predict function which you feed it your model and then you also feed it the variables and the values used, or excuse me, the value you want to use for every variable in your data set.

So in our case we're using our seasonal model, which controlled for seasonality.

So we have four variables in all of your lab instructions, Lab questions.

It will only have the three because we don't use a control variable in any of the lab instructions.

So you will only have to worry about time, treatment time, since which is very easy.

You only have to make sure you know what the time value is, which we've made very clear in the updated lab template.

So in our case we want to set time to 182 treatment to 0, timesense to 0.

And in our case, the time we're looking at happens to be February.

So we're going to make sure that we're factoring February and setting our month to be that.

And we put that all in a data frame and save it to an object.

And then we use predict function.

We have our model, we're using the seasonal model.

And then we're going to put our data frame with those different variables set and we're going to feed it into this new object and print it.

So now we can say the counterfactual deaths, the deaths we would have expected to happen or we would have predicted to happen had the intervention not occurred would have been 1,370 and that would be deaths casualties compared to our actual casualties, which was 1165.

We can already see that there is a 205 unit difference between the two.

Now, now in the lab instructions you'll be asked to calculate the difference, which is very straightforward.

You simply subtract from the counterfactual the actual number of deaths.

In this case, we'll go ahead and put that in our pace, just again, give it a cleaner output.

And as we've already said, we can estimate that 205 lives were saved because of the seatbelt law.

And that was in the, in the month 12 months after intervention.

So now let's go ahead and do a different one.

We're going to do the same process, but this time we're looking at the very last time period of our data set.

We're going to subset time period 192.

We can see that in the last month of our data set, 22 months after treatment, there is 1,763 casualties.

Once again we're using predictions, doing the exact same thing.

Time is 192, treatment is zero, TimeSense is zero.

And we're setting our month to 12 because this ends up in December.

So we need to make sure that our model, the month is set to that and we do the same process and we can see that our counterfactual is 1980 compared to the actual number of casualties, 1763.

And let's go ahead and find the difference between the two.

Oh, pause while my rstudio is being funny.

All right, welcome back.  I apologize for that.

Now we've got our output here.

We have our difference.

So the estimated lives saved in our final period or observation period, December of 1984, if I'm remembering correctly, 1984, we can estimate that our seatbelt law saved us approximately 217 lives.

So wonderful note here, this last part of the counterfactual section is really just describing and making sure that you understand the counterfactual is not a stagnant value after intervention.

Instead, it varies at different points in time like we previously described.

The counterfactual follows the pre intervention slope.

And so depending on what time interval you're looking at, the point on which that line is going to be changes.

And so the difference between our two slopes, or excuse me, our two counterfactuals at 12 months and at 22 months, they're both looking at what would have happened, the predicted number of casualties at that time had intervention not occurred.

But they're different specifically because they have different points in time we're looking at.

That's all that section is looking for.  Within Your lab.

Now the final verdict.

Let's just do some final output and see what we covered during this time.

Silly mistake.  Forgot to move that to text.

Excellent.  So we can see here we started with our naive model.

Once again we had high statistical significance in all of our variables.

Some overestimated immediate effects, some overestimated time since effects.

Technically, looking at the the what we've accomplished an underestimated time effect.

Sorry students.  Had to pause and come back here.

I did what I previously told you to be cautious of and I overwrote incorrectly.

I modified my Stargazer output where the covariate labels were not matching correctly.

Had to adjust that briefly.

So now we're looking at the model modules that we previously built in the order in which we did it.

So again, naive model time value, which I believe was just showing us treatment and so on.

So I corrected for those.

We had a naive model without robust standard errors showing high significance across the board here, very high impact on the immediate effect.

Then we ran our robust standard errors and see that the significance levels dropped, virtually disappeared across the board.

And then we went ahead and incorporated our seasonality control and we can see that our coefficient for time actually was reduced even further, meaning we had a slightly more negative pre intervention slope.

Our effect for the immediate immediate effect of the treatment was reduced quite a bit and was statistically significant.

And our time since coefficient was practically a third of what it used to be.

And then these intercepts again.

Remember this is just because we have introduced a new group, so we no longer have a normal constant.

If we didn't have the negative one like we described, month minus one in that seasonal model, we would have a normal intercept here.

But because we included the negative one, every group has its own intercept.

And then we did robust standard errors, retained our significance levels and even grew significance after accounting for robust standard errors.

So our final verdict is that the treatment had an immediate effect, saved approximately 300 lives right after the intervention.

Then casualties began to grow month over month from what they used to, with the change to our pre intervention slope being 6.87 more, putting us from a negative pre intervention slope to a positive post intervention slope.

Now let's go ahead and go through and take a visual look at this.

We have the observed number of deaths.

So each gray data point represents the actual observed deaths.

The red line is our fitted line based on our model.

The yellow line over here is the counterfactual.

And then the shaded red area is going to be the visual representation of the lives that were saved.

So between Our fitted model, our fitted line and our counterfactual line.

This is the estimated lives saved and then of course, our intervention.

A helpful way to look at the counterfactual up against the fitted lines and the observed deaths.

And this is just a summary of how many lives were saved during that entire period of time utilizing the predicted value, the actual deaths versus the predicted counterfactuals for each time period.

So we can infer that between the entire observation period, approximately 5,177 lives were saved due to the seatbelt law.

And that approximates to approximately.

That breaks down to 225 deaths per month.

So what can we say about the effectiveness of this lot?

Now, as evaluators, we want to be cautious and especially overestimating effects or being overly confident and always include the grain of salt.

There are limitations within our model.

Even even though we accounted for and controlled for seasonality, there are still many other potential factors we don't have a control group to possibly utilize to compare against.

Like a another neighboring country that had a seatbelt law rollout that we could have compared it against.

So there's a lot that our model still lacks.

So we always want to be very cautious when it comes to did the law work?

From what we see, yes, the law worked.

But our model is definitely limited what it's accounting for.

But based on the coefficients of our current model, what we can see, it does appear that there was an effect.  So let's recap.

We checked for autocorrelation.

We corrected for the autocorrelation with standard errors.

We incorporated seasonality into our model.

Then we did the same thing.

Based on those results, we see that there was an immediate effect to the tune of 300 deaths in the first 300 less deaths in the first month after rolling out the new law.

And then there was an increase in the pre intervention trend to the tune of seven deaths, bringing us up to a positive slope post intervention.

What are again some of the reasons why we might have noticed that regression to the mean is a very probable one.

Things tend to fluctuate, fluctuate back to those historical averages.

Again, as I mentioned before, there could be some behavioral adaptation.

The initial fear of tickets or fines waned as time went on.

And fines weren't as concerning as people thought.

So the people made the decision that it was more risky to risk getting or sorry, less risky to risk getting a fine than it was uncomfortable to wear a seat belt.

Or it could also be that wearing a seatbelt made people feel more safe and therefore they took More risk and thus casualties increased.

So there's a lot of possible options there.

But overall, the bottom line is that we do approximate, based on our model, that there was a reduction in deaths immediately in the short term, and then there was also a sort of regression or return to the mean afterwards.

Now this last section here is specifically to help you with the bonus question and to set the stage for our Difference in Difference modules next week.

Very important, we don't have a control group that we could use for this data set.

So I have simulated data simply for the purpose of calculating or building out a model for an interrupted time series with a control group.

So the following data is not real, can't take anything from it, it's just completely made up just for the purpose of demonstrating.

You're not required to do anything like this in the lab instructions.  Bonus question.

You will have the data set available.

You just have to build the model and interpret one of the coefficients.

So let's jump into it.

The interrupted time series model with control group is going to be very similar to what we have seen for our basic naive model, with the exception we're including a group, which is going to be another dummy flag for zero for control group, one for treatment group.

And we're going to utilize interaction terms, meaning that we're going to be multiplying two terms together.

And there's a few different ways we can do that, which I'll describe.

We're going to have the group times the treatment.  Excuse me.

We're going to introduce the new variable for just group, which again is just itself one or zero, and then we're going to interact that group with the treatment.

So we're going to do simply group variable times treatment and then another coefficient for group variable times.

Pardon me, group times time, and then group times treatment and then group times times, since as our interaction term.

So we would just need to build out a single new variable for group, and then of course have corresponding data for that group for time, treatment, outcome variable, etc.

We can see here, here are our variables.

This is again just going to simulate that data and prepare it so that we can build our model.

So your data will already have this set up so you don't have to do anything with it.

And then all you'd have to do is build your model, which we're going to do once again here.

So we have our outcome variable being deaths.

Casualties are same coefficients as before, time, treatment time.

Since then we do group, which is our new one, which we then interact with time and group Treatment and group, timesense and group.

And then we utilize our new data set.

There's a couple of ways that you can do this as well, which I describe right here in this note.

You can use a colon to interact.

So instead of a multiplication sign and asterisks here you can utilize a colon which performs the same thing.

You could also technically.

Well, I'm not going to get into that.

We won't tackle that at this point.

I believe we go over that in our diff and diff model.

So that's an option there.

Let's go ahead and run that model and see what our Stargazer output looks like.

Once again, I forgot to move that to type equals text.  There we go.

So I, I've chosen only to retain or to show the new terms and not our original terms.  Those would be different.

But you already know after all of this how to interpret those.

So time, treatment and time since are left out of this output and we only have the additional ones.

So we have four variables, Group which represents our difference at baseline, our interaction term between group between group and time, and then an interaction term between treatment and group and time since and group and then their corresponding coefficients.

So group in this case is going to be representative of the difference at baseline between, between the two groups.

So what that is is essentially our, our intercept.

So when time is equal to zero, our treatment group is going to have 203 less casualties at that time period compared to our control group.

So our control group is going to be representative of having just 200 more than our treatment group.

Or in the reverse order, our treatment group is going to have 200 less then.

So we'll call it Great Britain as our treatment group.  We'll call it.

I think I classified it somewhere, but irrelevant.

Our control group, City A country A is going to have 203 lessons.

And just a rule of thumb, remember that our group is flagged for one.

So our treatment group A one and zero.

So our treatment group is one, our control group is zero.

Remember that whatever your group that is one, that's what this represents.

So this is when, when that flag is turned on.

If you remember from previous courses, when that flag is turned on, this is the change that we would expect to see.

So again, treatment at baseline has 203 less our difference in the pre intervention trend.

So the group is turned on and time is turned on at a given period, the difference is representative of our pre intervention trend.

So this means that our treatment group had a non significant, slightly bigger slope of 0.04 but because it's not significant, there was no difference in the pre intervention trend.

Now, our treatment group, this is the one that you're going to be asked to interpret in your lab instructions.

This represents the difference in difference for the immediate effect.

So that's going to say that the difference in the treatment group and the control group was 400, negative 407.

So the control, pardon me, the treatment group experienced a 407 less casualties in the month following treatment compared to the control group.

Because once again, treatment is on, control group, group is on.

There is equal to 1, therefore it's the treatment group.

So the treatment group had 407 less casualties compared to the control group for the immediate effect or the the month following our treatment and it is statistically significant at the 0.01 level.

We're not going to go through and do autocorrelation on this.

We're just going to leave it as is.

You understand autocorrelation on robust standard errors.

Now, time, since in group, this is simply again the difference in the sustained effect between the treatment group and the control group.

So again, non significant.

So there is no difference as far as this goes.

But to interpret this 0.22, this would mean that the treatment group had a increase in the pre intervention slope that was 0.22 higher than whatever the control groups was and again, not statistically significant.

All right folks, that wraps up our very first code through.

Please reach out with any questions, post on the discussion board as needed and good luck on your first assignment.

