Hello class.  Welcome.

This week we're going through regression discontinuity design.

By now you should have gone through, read the lecture materials.

You would have seen my note too, that I left the announcement that I made.

Just giving you a heads up that focusing on the lecture specifically for the underlying principles of what regression discontinuity is for, how to set it up, what it's really doing.

But the LM model that it uses is not going to be the model that you should utilize.

It's great for teaching regression discontinuity, but it is a biased approach.

And so we're going to be discussing quite a bit in this week's code through there.

It's, it's quite dense.

I think it's actually in terms of lines of code and text, it is the longest code through that we have.

I do want to just reiterate it is very simple though regression discontinuity is very straightforward.

The reason it's dense this week is simply because we're going to be expanding on the LM function, talking about why the models shown in the lecture are biased.

Although great for teaching, we'll even use them in our lab because it's great for teaching.

But there are, it's a very, very big limitation with that, we'll utilize the LM function, a second version of it, using an interaction term which provides different slopes on each side of the cutoff, allowing us to ascertain a more accurate treatment effect.

And then last and really most important is we're going to spend a bunch of time talking about RD Robust, which is the new package that you will be expected to utilize for your lab.

And it's, it's the gold standard, so to say, of packages that you should utilize for this type of methodology.

So without further ado, let's jump into regression discontinuity design.

As always, if you have questions, contact me in the discussion board.

I'm happy to answer any of those questions or message me directly.

Okay, so give you, giving you an idea of what we'll go through.

Some of this will reiterate what you learned in the lecture materials itself.

Some of this is going to expand on where the lecture materials didn't dive in enough.

So we'll talk about when it's utilized different programs, examples of programs that have a cutoff and how you have, right around the cutoff you have a, a natural experiment, essentially a local, random, local randomization, excuse me, which you can then infer the treatment effect.

You can say basically those people right around the cutoff are so Similar that the only difference is treatment, whether they got it or not.

And therefore we can gauge the impact of that treatment effect between those two groups based on whether or not they got the treatment and then whatever our outcome variable is.

We'll also discuss in a little bit more detail what exactly the difference is between sharp and fuzzy RDDs and talk about how you can visualize those and test to see if you are working with a sharp RDD or a fuzzy RD for our purposes in this lab and are in this code through and in our lab, we will be working with sharp situations.

However, you can determine whether or not at the end of this part of me, you'll be able to determine whether or not your data is fuzzy.

And if so, you'll just have to take a different approach, which we don't go into great detail in here, but you will have to utilize an instrumental variable and you can learn more about that outside of this course in in future learning.

Again, for this we will be focusing on a sharp design, but I will show you how to differentiate.

And then for the context of our policy problem, we'll go through in our code through, we will be using the RD robust package, which contains a data set about Senate elections, and then gauging whether or not there is an incumbency advantage.

So if you win a close election, are you more likely to win the next one?

And again, that's working with the data set that's built in directly with the already robust package.

So you can go through and do this on your own as well.

Then we'll talk about a very naive approach of simply doing a means test and why that could be misleading.

We'll move into doing the LM functions, talking again about how you how regression discontinuity solves this problem of a local randomized treatment, and then go through two iterations of the LM function, two different versions, and then we'll move into already robust here and then talk about how you can calculate the counterfactual and then go over the assumptions like I mentioned before, testing whether or not we're working with sharp or fuzzy data, and then finally just wrap it up explaining our outcomes.

All right, so to give a few examples, in fact, this is the example we'd have we have in our lab this week.

There's a lot of programs out there where there's a strong cutoff or a clear cutoff, where if you're below, above or below it, it determines whether or not you get something.

This can be housing assistance programs, it could be health care Coverage from the Affordable Care act, the amount of a subsidy you get it the treatment is.

Or there's various gradual treatments.

Sorry, with the, the Affordable Care act example at different income levels, you get different amounts of treatment.

Treatment then being subsidies to help pay for your health insurance.

In our case, again, we're talking more about sharp designs which would be students having to attend summer school based on their math test.

So if their end of year math test they score below 60, then they have to attend summer school.

We want to see in the following year how did they perform in math?

Did summer school impact their math score?

So we have students who are just below 60 have to take summer school.

That's like 59.

Somebody just above is 61 points doesn't have to attend summer school.

And we can say the those students are so similar in terms of their math scores.

One maybe just had a good day, one maybe just had a bad day.

But they're so similar that we can say the effect of the treatment summer school can cause a difference in their 9th grade math GPA is what we're looking at in the lab.

So that's an example of a cutoff.

Another could be families earning below a threshold.

They qualify for various housing assistance.

So if you have to earn, you know, 100% of the or if you earn below the poverty line, you automatically qualify for some amount of housing assistance.

Anything above you don't, you have a cutoff that determines whether or not you receive this treatment.

In that case being housing assistance.

In our example for the code through, we'll be looking at seeing if whether you receive more votes in an election causes you to have more votes in the following election.

Again, the incumbency advantage.

And so the problem though is in where RDD solves for is the problem if you do a means test between those two groups.

Let's say students who scored above or below 60.

If you took everybody who scored above 60 and average those scores and compared them against everybody who scored below 60 and therefore attended summer school.

If you compared those two groups, they're so different because covering such a wide array of types of students and underlying characteristics that that would not be a fair assessment.

And so the beauty of RDD is it just focuses right there at the cutoff where the difference is so minimal, but the difference determined treatment.

And again, you should already know this from the lab.

This is likely repetitive thus far.

I'm going to try not to be so repetitive since hopefully by now you understand most of these underlying concepts.

So.  So I'll try to move Forward a little faster.

As always, you can circle back to the lecture to refresh on anything that we miss.

So moving forward.  So RDD focuses strictly at the cutoff.

And then again, I mentioned, it creates this, this local randomization where those just below and those just above are so similar that we can essentially treat this like it's a randomized or local randomization or natural experiment, you may call it, to estimate our causal effect.

So first thing we have to do though, when we're working with RDD is determine whether or not we're working with a sharp or a fuzzy design.

And the way that we determine that or how we define that is sharp means that the cutoff is very hard.  It's strict.

So anybody who scores above 60 on the math test in eighth grade will not attend summer school.

And anybody who scores below will attend summer school.

Sharp is another way of saying that somebody with a 59 score will not be able to somehow convince their teacher that they do not have to take summer school.

And therefore somebody scoring below 59 doesn't attend summer school, whereas maybe somebody who scored 61 gets into summer school.

So the point being, an RDD means that the lines are not blurred.

There is a very strict line below, attend summer school.

Above does not.

If you have some kind of blurring the lines or people hopping across the cutoff for treatment, then you have moved into the territory of a fuzzy regression discontinuity design.

An example would be instead of a hard set summer school rule, instead it's students below 60 are just recommended to attend tutoring, but it's optional if you meaning that you have this subset below 60 that some did, some did not attend.

In that type of a situation, you would need to incorporate an instrumental variable technique.

As I mentioned, at the top of this, we will be only focusing on a Sharp rdd.

But I would recommend that you go and explore how to utilize a fuzzy rdd.

And in fact, the RD robust package we'll be using is also great for tackling fuzzy regression discontinuity designs.

Okay, moving into our data again, the question being, does winning a close election give you an advantage in the next election?

We will be working with data that is already included in the RD robust data set.

And let's look at some of our variables here.

Pardon me.  So margin.

Margin is our first variable.

This is our running variable.

The way, the way that this is like our math score.

Let's say we want to center our math score and we say that somebody scored 80, the cutoff is 60, we would center it by saying 80 minus 60, ultimately getting everything to be centered around that cutoff, thereby making our interpretation of our intercept far more meaningful.

And then the, the, the subsequent predictions more meaningful.

Now, margin in our case is already centered, but the way that we do this is we're taking the percentage of the votes that a Democratic candidate received, whether that's 30, whether that's 50, whether that's 60, whether it's 100% of the votes in that particular election.

And we're subtracting from that the percentage of the votes that the Republican got.

So we're only looking at Democrat versus Republican here.

And Democrat is going to be the first left value.

Republican is going to be our right value.

So in the case of margin, it also tells us if the Democrat won or lost.

And we know that because if the Democrat, if the margin is a positive value, that means that the Democrat had more share of the votes than the Republican.

Let's say that this Democrat received 30 or 50% of the vote.

This Republican received.

Sorry, I think I said 50%.

So let's say this Democrat received 50% of the vote.

This Republican earned 35% of the vote.

That means that our margin value would be 15 or 15.

So the Democrat won by 15% of the vote.

That's what margin would represent here.

In a perfect tie, margin would be at zero.

The Democrat and the Republican received the same number of votes or the same percentage of votes.

And so it's margin equals zero.

No winner, not.

I actually don't think this data set contains that, but I didn't check.  So who knows?

With that being said, on the flip side, if the Republican received more percentage of the votes than the Democrat, then we would have.  Let's flip it.

Let's say 35% went to the Democrat, 50% went to the Republican.

That would give us a value of negative 15%.

So a negative value in the margin column represents that the Democrat candidate lost and by how many percentage points.

Now, very important, we're looking at different time periods.

So margin is representing the difference in the percentage of votes between the Democrat and the Republican candidate in time one.

So that's just represented by T. Now our outcome variable, which is vote vote represents the actual percentage of votes received at the following election.

Pardon me, I'm highlighting too much there.

In the following election.

So we're calling it T plus one.  So two things.

Margin is centered.

It represents the difference by which the Democrat won or lost vote is the actual percentage of or the actual share of votes in the following election for that Same Senate.

And again, this is our outcome variable.

So 35% or a value of 35 in the vote column would be saying that in the following election the Democrat candidate received 35% of the vote.

Hopefully that makes sense.

We'll look at an example here shortly.

This is the data set we're looking at.

And again we want to look at the cutoff and just say, did winning a close election, because we're looking at the cutoff, produce more votes or mean that we get more votes in the next election, otherwise known as an incumbency advantage.

So let's go ahead and pull this up.  Oh, sorry.

And just to recap, in this data set, it comes with the margin or running variable centered already.

Very importantly, you're going to have to center your running variable in your lab.

So just be aware it does not come pre centered.

You will have to do that in the lab.

Not anything complicated, but just want to make sure that's reiterated.

We'll be loading in RD robust.

This is the package we're using.

If you don't have it and you want to follow along, install it.

And then we're going to load it utilizing this string here.

Save it to a data or an object we're going to call Senate.

And let's look at the first couple of rows.

So margin once again is going to be plus or minus depending on whether or not the Democrat candidate one.

Looking at row one, this is saying that the Democrat candidate at time one lost by approximately 7.5% compared to the Republican.

And then in the following election, that same seat, the Democrat in the same for the same seat received 36.

We'll round up call it 36.1% of the vote over here.

This is close to the cutoff here.

Arguably we had the Democrat losing by about 4% in the following election.

They received 45% of the vote, 45.5% of the vote.

Now we have two really interesting examples here.

So this one right here, they lost, so not very close to the cutoff, lost by negative 27.5% in time one, but then they received about 48.5% of the vote at the following election.

Here we have a, you know, fairly close race and then 36% of the vote.

But here we have a really bad weight loss by the Democrat.

And in the following election appears that this would be a pretty darn close race.

It doesn't tell us if the candidate won or not here though.

And then we have one that's very close to the cutoff.

So the Democrat Won in this case by only 0.73% of the vote.

So they barely beat the, the Republican.

Interestingly, you can see that in the following election this candidate only received or this seat only, the Democrat for the seat only received 39.8% of the vote.

And in fact, sorry, I say this, the Democrat that would be this candidate, I would assume they won and then they're running again and the following election they only received 39.8% of the vote.

So hopefully that the data on the underlying data that we're working with makes sense.

Let's go ahead and do a couple other summary stats here.

We're working with almost 1400 rows.

1390.

Let's do some summary statistics.

First thing I want to call out is we have 93 rows that are not that have nulls.

And so these will be filtered out when we get down to using our, our, our packages for modeling.

Some other interesting things is we have margin again representing by how much the Democrat candidate won or lost.

In this case, we have some instances where the Democrat candidate lost completely.

I would assume that this is a uncontested location or an uncontested seat.

So The Republican received 100% of the votes.

On the flip side, we also have some uncontested seats for the Democrats where they won by 100% of the votes.

Interestingly, we can also see that there is a median of 2.16.

So the center of our data ends up being that Democrats win the most of the time in our data set at least, and they win by about 2 percentage points compared to the Republican.

But interestingly, I keep saying Interestingly, the average is 7%.

So it indicates that we have some quite a bit of were weighted heavy on the Democrats winning side where our mean is higher than our median.

So it seems like we have a lot of uncontested or landslide victories for the Democrats in this, in this data set.

Then over on the vote side, again representing the actual.

Forgive me, I'm going to pause.

My mouse died.

Okay, sorry folks, my Bluetooth mouse died.  Had to get that plugged in.  Now that we're back.

Let's see.

I think I was just getting into the vote column.

So vote represents the actual raw percentage points or raw share of votes received by the Democrat candidate.

And we can see here that in the end this is the time plus one.

So the next election we have again, some Democratic candidates were getting 0% of the vote.

Then we have some, or these are, I see assume uncontested seats.

Same with Democrats winning a hundred percent of the votes.

But in the middle here we have the median being at 50%.

So the median being where Democrats appear to win the majority of the time by a little bit.

So we have a pretty tight race there.

And then we have the mean, the average weighting up a little bit more, indicating that in the following election we also have more Democrats winning, thereby weighting up, or, sorry, winning by a lot, thereby weighting the mean to be a little bit higher than the median.

Okay, so enough summary statistics.

Let's go ahead and get a couple visualizations.

Going to look at some of our data.

We're going to do a histogram and then a scatter plot.

We just want to look at the distribution of the data and then right around the cutoff, we want to just see how things are looking there and then also do the scatter plot just to see if there's any clear, any clear patterns.

Pardon me to notice when we look at it.

So here we have a fairly normal distribution for our vote margin.

So again, this is looking at the volume of instances where we have different bend margins.

So we're going from negative 100 to 100.

Looks like we're binning, I don't know, roughly every 10, every five or so.

And then we have a fairly normal distribution as mentioned earlier.

And as we saw with the difference between our median and our mean, we have quite a few instances of Democrats having landslide victories.

That's pretty interesting to call out there.

Right around the cutoff, it looks like we've got most of our races are winding up over here in these close to the cutoff surroundings.

So most races end up close to the cutoffs or either winning or losing by rough to say, but you know, call it 15, 20 or so.

Moving over to the scatter plot, we can see on the left side of our cutoff here.

This would be negative margin.

This indicates that we had a loss.

So the Democrat lost.

On the right side we have the Democrats win.

So positive margin right off the rip.

Once again, just calling it out.

We have a lot of Democrats that received these landslide victories over here.

Uncontested seats, I would argue.

And so we have this likely weighting up all of our values.

But one interesting thing here is you can see there appears to be this, this clustering at a lower level on the left side.

So those just below the cutoff cluster, sorry, those clustered on the left side of the cutoff tend to have a lower vote in the following election.

Again, Y axis represents the share of the votes in the following election.

We can see here that they are appear to be a lower weight or a lower average, excuse me, compared to those who win.

And we can see that there's just a clear jump from about right here up.

Our lower values are with are higher above the losing side.

So we'll see this more when we plot the averages.

But just right off the rip on a scatter plot, you can see that there is a clear difference between winners and losers.

So we're going to start by doing just a very naive comparison.

Let's get going by first building our treatment or treatment variable.

All it's going to be is if margin is greater than zero, we're going to call it one for treatment, otherwise saying yes, they win.

And that's what we're measuring.

We want to say gauge whether or not the incumbency advantage is real if it helps produce more votes in the following election.

So once again we're flagging yes if it's margin is positive and no if margin is negative, meaning they won or they lost.

So let's get it just to count.

We have 640 instances where they lost, 750 instances where they won.

And let's just look at the averages here.

So if we're going to do the average of the vote, so this is the actual share of votes at the time after the election or the election after the win or loss.

And we're only looking at the treatment group.

So these are the winners.

So average of winners and then the average of the losers.

And we're saying the winners, incumbents receive on average 62.62% of the votes in the election following the win or the loss, while those that lost only receive about 40.92%.

So about 41% of the votes.

So we're seeing a 21.7% difference between the two groups.

Let's see if that is statistically significant by running a very simple T test.

You'll have to use this in your lab, so just be familiar with it.

All it is is T test.

You have your outcome variable, then you have a binary for your treatment flag similar to how you would set up an LM model.  Very simple.

In fact, if you were to just run this using lm, it would also do the same thing as a T test.

It's just a means test at that point.

So let's look here we have our two averages as we saw previously.

We have our confidence interval and we have our P value indicating that it's highly statistically significant.

So it does appear that there is a statistically significant difference between our two means.

Now with the 95% confidence interval, it's saying that our mean difference, if we 90, 95% of the time, excuse me, we would find a mean difference somewhere between the two of, of 20 to 23 percentage points.

But importantly, like we already know, we know that the groups or those like for instance the Democrats that are winning by landslides are not very similar to these, although rare Democrats that are losing by, by a lot.

So we know that if we just compare these groups we're not going to get an appropriate assessment bias, selection bias is introduced in there.

And so this T test is just a very rudimentary attempt to explain what we already know, that the means testing is not the appropriate method.

So let's break this down a little bit more and let's just plot these.

Looking at the means difference here, as mentioned before, you can see that there's a clear jump.

The red dotted horizontal line represents the average vote share in the following election for the losers.

While the darker blue horizontal line represents the average vote share for winners in the following election.

Just based on the means test, like we already saw with the T test, we can see here that there is a clear jump between losing and winning.

But chalking it all up to say that winning this is an incumbency advantage would be unreasonable.

So let's continue to dig in.

So, and again the problem is is that those that are on far away from the cutoff are not similar.

So RDD allows us to focus in really close to the cutoff and then create that local randomization that can allow us to determine a better inference.

So we can say those really close to the cutoff when those who won by 1% or those who lost by 1% are essentially identical, very similar in many regards.

And so we want to look at those engage that that treatment effect again treatment effect being the, the effective incumbency.

So we have here our very basic formula, our model for rd.

And importantly, this is the.

This particular model assumes parallel trends.

What that means is that it assumes that the slope is the same side of the cutoff.

For your lab, I believe it asks for the formula.

I believe it does.

I could be mistaken.

But if it does, importantly, you're more than welcome to use this formula or you can use the interaction formula that we see later.

Either way, you'll get credit for it.

But just know that this formula is not accounting for different slopes on each side of the cutoff.

Now if we were to take this and sorry for this Again we have our outcome variable.

We have our intercept with work when which when we're working with a centered running variable represents the average of those that did not receive treatment.

So the control group and the treatment effect.

And then we have our running variable again being centered with the errors.

Now in our particular data setup for our code through our outcome variable, again we're looking at the share of votes at time period plus one.

And then we have our our margin is cut off.

And so beta 0 represents our average vote share for the losers at time plus 1.

Beta 1 is our treatment coefficient.

So this is when if it's winning you, if you won it's a number one, if you don't or sorry it's flag on which is number one.

If not it's zero or a loss.

And then our margin centered so again predicted outcome up for the loser right at the cutoff.

That's what our beta zero represents the treatment effect or the jump at the cutoff is what our beta one represents.

And then the relationship between margin and next election vote share, that's our slope for Beta 2.

Excuse me.

Now to move into the iterations of the LM function that I said we'd be going through.

I'm going to preface this here.

As I mentioned, this model is based on this naive and biased model.

The reason we call this model naive and biased is because it's forcing our our data to create parallel slopes on each side of the cutoff.

It's saying that we will restrict the data in such a way that we can only have a linear line and that line has to be parallel on each side of the cutoff.

So we can see a jump, but we can't see a change in slope.

And that's because we're not including an interaction term which is going to be the second iteration we're going to go through.

But for simplicity sake and in your lab, you will use this very naive model and it's what you saw in the lecture, you're going to use it because we'll that's this.

The coefficients from this.

Excuse me, is what we'll use for calculating our manual counterfactual later.

Long story short, just know that this is not a methodology or this is not an approach that you should use in the real world because it introduces this bias prefacing all this right now just so you are aware and you don't make that mistake later.

And again, to reiterate this one final time, it's biased because it restricts both sides of the cutoff to be the same slope when in reality they're likely not.

A caveat and it's noted in your lab.

Our lab uses simulated data and the the slope is already based on that simulated data the same on both sides.

So we don't need to utilize the second alternate or the second iteration of the LM that we'll use here with an interaction term.

Either way I'm getting ahead of myself.

But just know the lab will let you use this for the questions that ask you to use the LM function.

But really you shouldn't use it in the real world.

Really you should just stick with already robust.

Moving on.

So we're going to go ahead and run our basic naive model.

So we've got vote as our outcome treat which again we created is positive margin is treat on.

So that's one negative margin is treat off, that's zero and margin is our actual difference between the Democrat share of the votes and the Republican share of the votes.

And see so we got stargazer on setting type to text.

Remember to always make sure that you set it to HTML and use results as is when you're knitting.

So initially we have a highly statistically significant effect.

So this indicates that there was a jump at the cutoff so those who won the election when treatment is on.

So those winners the incumbents appear to receive 4.785% more votes at time period 2 the following election compared to those who lost vote margin.

This is saying that for every additional point of margin received, we would anticipate the the Democrat to receive about 0.348% more of the vote in the following election.

And importantly, because margin is centered our cutoff, our constant here represents the loser at the cutoff.

So a loser with a margin of zero or somebody who lost with a margin of zero would receive about 47.331% of the votes at time period two the following election.

So as we've already mentioned, this is simply reiterating everything in text.

Now let's visualize this so you can see what I mean about the parallel slopes.

So we have the same scatter plot, but now we have our parallel line.

So taking the vote margin slope here again, for every additional unit of margin received, this is how many more, how much more share of the votes we'd expect you to receive using that as our slope.

Again, it's a slope, it's a global slope.

So it's across all of the data, not accounting for those who lost and those who won.

We force that slope to fit and there that also gives us a more restrictive jump at the cutoff here.

But we have the same line in parallel on each sides.

We can see the jump of 4.8 points for those who win getting more votes in the following election.

So this is the parallel trends that I'm describing.

So now I want to move into using an interaction model.

So this is, this, this is a step up and this is the alternative model that you could use or the alternative formula you could use in your lab.

Either one will get you the points.

Because it's kind of confusing that we're using these different variations of the LM function.

Long story short, the biggest thing I want everybody to take away from this is use RD robust.

It's going to be the best for your regression discontinuity designs.

Now, moving back to the interaction model, forcing each side to have the same slope restricts us from ascertaining the most accurate treatment effect because we're saying that those who win have to have the same slope as those who lost.

So what this is likely doing in our data, just by looking at the scattered plot, the scatter plot, is we, we know that the average of winners is much higher compared to the average of losers.

So what this is doing is it's saying because we have to fit a slope, the same slope across all of this data, it's saying that it's, it's likely driving up the slope for the, the losers and driving down the slope for the winners.

So it's not actually representative of each side being a winner or a loser.

How do we solve for that?

We introduce an interaction term.

So this is a very subtle but simple thing to do.

So we have our model here with the interaction term looks exactly the same, except we include a third variable, beta 3, which is simply going to be interacting our treatment with margin.

We've seen interaction terms in other modules, so it shouldn't be complicated, but what this simply does is it allows us to give the two different slopes.

So now our beta 2 represents the slope of the losers.

So those on the left side where our slope on the right side is going to be a combination of beta 2 and beta 3.

So our new interaction term represents the difference between the loser side and the winner side.

So beta 2 plus beta 3 creates the actual slope, or yeah, the actual slope on the right side for those of the winners.

So let's go ahead and do this.

And one other caveat too.

I think we covered this in a previous module, but there's like a shorthand and a longhand version for interaction terms, the way I prefer to do it, because I feel like it's more clean, is to use this top one here, where you have your outcome variable.

You have the same model we built previously.

We just include that beta 3.

I feel like this is just more clear and less confusing, but R interprets at the same.

So we have our normal model.

Then we include our interaction term here.

However, you can get the exact same result by simply doing treat times margin.

So your outcome variable then treat times margin or your treatment effect times your running variable.

And that will give you the same result.

And we can see that here.

So let's put these all three in Stargazer.

We have our naive biased estimate.

We have our interaction term using the longhand, and then we have our shorthand version here.

So side by side we can see our basic model, which we already looked at.

There's no interaction term, so we don't have an adjustment.

We have a shared slope across all of the data.

Our treatment effects was 4.785, meaning that for those who win, we would expect them to receive 4.785% additional votes compared to the losers.

And in the following election.

Our slope is saying that for every additional unit of margin received, we would Expect to receive 0.348% more vote share in the following election.

And those at the Cutoff receive about 47.331% of the vote share in the following election.

But the on the loser.

Sorry, let me reframe that to make sure I say that correctly.

A loser at the cutoff.

So a margin of zero.

We would anticipate them to receive about 47.331% of the votes in the following election.

Now, looking at our other two models, I just want to point out they're exactly the same.

I only included both to demonstrate that either version, shorthand, longhand, they're the same.

Feel free to use each one.

I prefer the longhand because I feel like it's more straightforward with the actual model we use.

But either way, your call.

That being said, by allowing both sides of the cutoff to have their own slope, notice how we're able to get a different treatment effect.

It doesn't just affect our slopes between the two sides, it actually affects our treatment or it adjusts our treatment effect so our treatment effect jumps.

It goes from 6 or 4.785% to 6.044%.

Now saying that those who win at time period one will receive 6.044% more votes, more share of the votes compared to the loser in the following election.

So our treatment remains statistically significant and it also went up.

Now this is really cool.

As mentioned before, I said that the global slope that was provided earlier was likely overestimating on the loser side.  So it was over.

It was higher than what it truly was on the loser side and lower than what it should be on the winner side.  So let's look and see.

So we know vote margin here.

Beta 2 represents just the slope of the losers.

So our losers only have a slope of 0.216, meaning for every unit of margin received.

If you're a loser, that sounds rude, but sorry, that's just they lost the election, so it's easier to chalk it up to just calling them the loser in a non derogatory way.

So the loser of that election only receives 0.216% more vote share in the following election if they lost.

Now if we wanted to see the difference, the difference between the losers and the winners, winners have a steeper slope where winners have a slope of the cumulative value of both of these.

So 0.386386.

Yeah, 0.386.

If you combine beta two and beta three, that's your slope for the winner side.

So 0.386, which is greater than our global slope we calculated before.

Again, calling back to what I mentioned previously, this is the in between basically of your loser side slope and your winner slide slope.

So now we see that the winners have a steeper slope, meaning for every additional share of, or sorry, for every additional point of margin unit of margin received at time period one, you are expected to receive if you win an additional 1.7 or sorry, 0.17% of the vote share in the following election.

So there's a big impact of winning apparently.

Last note, I'm going to say here because I'm getting long winded, is the intercept changed so it still represents the loser at the cutoff.

So a margin of zero and you didn't win.

The average vote share in the following election is 44.9, which is less than what we had previously calculated.

All this to say, it's very important to to know first that using the LM functions period for regression discontinuity is not the right approach.

We'll get into more of that more shortly as to why, but if you were to do it for demonstration purposes or to just simply understand the difference, you would want to utilize an interaction term to create a unique slope on each side of the cutoff.

Now let's look at this Visually here just a note too, because we're going to pull these up later.

Actually we'll be pulling these up later.

We saved the coefficients from this naive model right here.

We're going to use beta zero, beta one, beta two later.

I just don't want you to confused.

Get confused as to where we save those because we saved them right there.

So now let's pull up our visual.

Now we can see here that we have two distinct slopes on each side of the cutoff.

We can see that the slope becomes far more steep and for the winners.

So there is a greater effect of winning on vote share in the following election.

Okay, all of that to say don't use LM to begin with, but it's helpful to go through those steps with something you're familiar with.

And now we can jump into the difference isolating why LM has limitations when it comes to regression discontinuity and why RD robust is the better approach.

So the LM approach uses all the data.

So even though we're using the.

The even though we went from using all the data to create a single slope here, it's using all the data on all ends, not just those around the cutoff.  It's using all of it.

Both approaches are using all the data.

Except the difference is the slope is being calculated with this side of the cutoff and this side of the cutoff uniquely.

But both are still using all of the data points.

Whereas for RDD we want right at the cutoff.

With both LM approaches we're using all of the data.

We could technically filter down our data and say we only want to look at those that are, you know, negative 10, positive 10 at the cutoff.

But it's.  It's tricky as to determining what exactly our cutoff should be.

So we'll talk about that shortly.

We call that bandwidth.

We'll talk about how RD robust is exceptional at automatically determining that.

We could do something similar with lm, but then we would have to do a whole bunch of background underlying math and a lot of different options in order to balance which bandwidth is the right based on number of observations.

Anywho, getting ahead of myself.

But just know either way LM is using all the data, unless you wanted to pre filter it, but then you run into other issues too.

So LM uses all the data and then it also assumes linearity, so it's going to have a linear slope across the board.

There's some other additional things you can do for it, but it's not as straightforward.

So it does Include assume a linear approach on each side.

And then also it doesn't the the standard errors may be wrong based on the different part of me the way that it calculates our standard errors because it uses the linear approach, whereas the RD robust has the ability to utilize a polynomial approach to calculate the standard errors.

Long story short, for various this and more for these reasons and more, RD robust is the way that we should go.

So let's learn about RD robust.

First, it automatically calculates the optimal bandwidth.

So again, instead of you having to manually determine if you wanted to use LM, I want to go negative 10 or negative 50 or negative 5 plus or minus, whatever your cutoff is in order to narrow down what exactly is the cutoff area we're looking at or those around the cutoff, how we determine that instead of you having to do that yourself, The RD robust package automatically calculates the optimal bandwidth for you.  That's huge.

It also automatically takes into consideration bias correction, allowing us to get.

And that uses the again, the local polynomials I mentioned.

It gives us the proper standard errors, gives us the confidence intervals that have the correct coverage.

It also automatically incorporates unique slopes on each side of the cutoff.

So let's talk about bandwidth.

Bandwidth is super important because as we know, RDD is specifically wanting to look at those around the cutoff.

But the question is, how do we, how do we operationally define that cutoff?

And then what are some of the drawbacks that we're trying to balance here?

If we go really narrow on the bandwidth that could be, we're zooming in very, very tight to just those, let's say within five percentage points in our example here.

So negative five plus five at the cutoff.

We only want to look at that.

That's a very, very comparable group.

But the less observations, the fewer actual observations that we have.

It means that there's more noise in the data.

So the more observations as we know, the better our inference.

Now, if we go too wide, though, on the flip side, if we go wider, let's say plot plus or minus 20, even plus or minus 30, 50, we get way more observations.

But as we go away from that cutoff, our groups become less comparable.

And then we're having poor inference because we're comparing different people.

So the treatment effect isn't the same across the board because again, it's, it's different people, there's unobserved characteristics that feed into that, different amounts of money that were put into the campaigns for the different candidates.

There's a lot of unobserved variables not being accounted for when we get farther away from the cutoff.

And so the question is, is how do we balance these?

And that's the beauty of RD robust with its optimal bandwidth calculations.

It determines it for us.

We're going to talk about how we can run a few different manual tests to check different bandwidths just to increase our confidence in our results.

But RD robust does this for us.

Now let's actually get into the meat of the model.

How we use the package.

It is.  It feels slightly antiquated compared to how LM works only because you have to utilize the index in order to pull in your variable.

So first you have Y, that's your outcome variable.

In our case it's the vote column.

So antiquated again, because we're using subsetting here, we're saying from the Senate object, we want to pull the column vote, that's Y outcome variable.

Now, our running variable is classified as X.

So that's the argument X in this package or in the function.  Excuse me.

And in that case we also have to use the subsetting for margin and C is what we tell it our cutoff is.

In this case, our cutoff is zero, which is the default already.

So technically we can leave this out and it would be the exact same because it assumes our cutoff is euro anyway.

Now in the case of your lab, your cutoff is 60 and so you would have to explicitly state that your cutoff is 60.

So C equals 60.

One other big caveat, RD robust, the way it stores data doesn't work well with Stargazer.

I say it doesn't get along, it really doesn't.

So you won't be able to use Stargazer and RD robust outputs.

So just use summary.

There's a lot of data, there's a lot of output, so we'll go through it.

I'm not going to go through everything will pause for a second.

So you can stay here and look back at it as you wish.

But you can also check the RD robust documentation that explains what all of the output is here.

So let's go ahead and run our RD robust model.

Oops, canceled that.

Okay.  See what I mean?

That's a lot of a lot of output compared to our LM functions.

So we're going to go through a couple things again.

I'm not going to go through all of it because some of it doesn't necessarily matter for our purposes.

But it is still important to know first and foremost our number of observations.

This is the number of non null observations.

In our data set recall earlier that we had, I believe it was 93 nulls in our data set.

The package automatically filters it out and so this tells you how many non null observations there are.

Bandwidth type this is the method that it used to calculate our bandwidth.

In this case it was the mean squared error, which I believe is actually the default.

I think you can replace the argument with something different.

Don't quote me on that.

Either way, that just optimizes the balance between the bias and the variance.

Something that you don't have to do if you use RD robust, but you would have to do if you were trying to just manually determine your cutoff with the LM function.

So again, another huge check on the side of why RD robust is a better option.

So we have the methodology used to determine the bandwidth.

Kernel, this is also another thing that I didn't touch on, but is really important if you were to use the LM function.

It assigns a uniform weight regardless of where how close to the cutoff an observation is.

With RDRobust, it takes an argument for kernel, which kernel means the the shape it uses to establish or to define pullback, not those words to assign a weight to different observations.

What that means is triangular means that you have a triangular shape around the cutoff, where the closer you are to the cutoff, the closer an observation is to the cutoff, more weight is placed on those observations.

And as you move further, farther away from the cutoff, less weight is put on those.

So it's really trying to focus on those at the cutoff.

So even though we have a bandwidth that we'll talk about, those closer to the cutoff itself will receive more weight than those farther away.

Long story short, kernel is the methodology it's using or the shape it's using to determine that.

I believe it takes two different arguments other than triangular.

I can't remember them right off the.

Right off the rip, but one is a uniform like lm.

If you did want to give it the same weight across the board and I can't remember the other one, I think I wrote it down in here.

I don't have it in here.  You guys.

Again, more than welcome to check the documentation, but that's what that means.

And then let's jump to the observations down here.  I'm sorry, vce.

This is the way that it calculates the.

The standard errors.  Excuse me.  And that's in.

In stands for nearest neighbor.

Yeah, nearest neighbor.

Okay, moving to this second section.

Number of observations.  Now we split.

So now we're saying how many observations are on each side of the cutoff?

So on the loser side of the cutoff, we had 595 observations.

On the winner side of the cutoff we had 702.

Now we further reduce that though, and we say within optimized bandwidth, how many observations do we have?

When we look at the bandwidth, which I'll explain in a Second, we have 360 within the bandwidth on the left side, the loser side, and 323 on the winner side.

The order the P here is one.

This means we're using a linear model.

You can also include an argument here where you set p equals 2 and then that uses a polynomial value.

So again we use the curved line in order to determine our estimate Q.

Not super important.  But that's saying, this is saying that we're using a polynomial in order to calculate our standard errors.

So it's really, if you have linear here, you add one and then it uses the next level up to calculate the standard errors.

Not super important for anything that we do in this lab.

So you don't have to worry too much about that.

This is what's really important.

The H value here, our bandwidth.

This is saying that the optimized bandwidth is minus 17.754.

So those that lost by up to 17.754% of the vote and those who won by up to 17.7 0.754% of the vote are.

Those is the bandwidth that we're looking at.

This is how we've defined our cutoff.

This is the subset of the group that we're looking at and that our treatment effect applies to.

That's really important too.  We'll talk about that.

But that's the local area treatment effect or localized area treatment effect.

Latte late.

Anywho, moving on.

So let's now move down to our treatment.

So we have our conventional treatment estimate.

And this is saying that our.

This is the actual value of our estimate.

So 7.414% saying that for those that win the incumbent advantage is by winning a close election, you would receive 7.414% more share of the vote in the following election compared to those who lost.

This is our incumbency advantage.

And then we have our P value here, which is zero.

So we are highly statistically significant.

And this is one thing that's really neat for RD, robust.

It gives us our 95% confidence interval.

So we can say we're 95% confident.

If we were to do this experiment 100 times, 95% of the time our estimate would fall between 4 and 10.  We'll call it 11.

Actually, we'll just round it up to 11.

4 and 11%, meaning that the.

The estimated effect of the incumbency advantage would fall somewhere between 4.1 and 10.9%.

Pretty huge.

I told you guys I would pause here, so I'm going to hold here for a second.

You can look through this as you need.

I don't think you need too much of this for your lab.

Okay, so we already went through the results.

I'll pause here in case you wanted to reference these later to help you in the lab.

So we, we know that there is a highly statistically significant effect for those who win close elections to get more share of the votes in the following election.

We've established that based on this.

Now we've also received or established that RD Robust automatically calculates the optimal bandwidth.

But a good rule of thumb is to test that ourself.

And this area is a little dense.

This is a bonus question in the lab.

Feel free to tackle it if you wish.

I think it's actually the only bonus question.

So this is worth 10 points extra in the lab if you wanted to go ahead and tackle it.

And it's pretty easy.  There's just like a.

There's a lot of subsetting you have to deal with.

So I'll pause here too, so you can reference this later.

So the bandwidth sensitivity, this is an analysis that's really important in the real world.

You don't have to do in a lab.

As I said, it's just something that's there if you wanted to earn some bonus points.

But what we're saying is, yes, RD Robust automatically calculated it, but let's just dot our I's and cross our T's and let's run a few different variations and just see if our estimate changes drastically.

If we notice any big changes with different bandwidths, it might, might be something that could be alarming, or if our estimate goes from positive to negative or negative to positive, like maybe we should be concerned, maybe there's a data integrity issue, or maybe we need to check our work more.

All that to say this is a helpful analysis to include in any kind of work you do.

So what we're going to do is we're going to save our default bandwidth so the optimal bandwidth that are, pardon me, our already robust function calculated for us.

And then what we're going to do is manually calculate multiple models using different bandwidths based on that.

So we're going to say what's.

What if we use half, half of it and then one and a half the value of our bandwidth that was optimal, automatically determined and then double it.

So let's look at the first half.

So if we were to simply do the same exact model, but we're going to use the argument H, which is our bandwidth, and we're going to say we want to do half of the bandwidth that was optimized.

So we're going to cut this down to be what is that, like nine, eight something.

Just had a total brain fart on simple math, like 8 1/3.

Something around there is what our bandwidth, the half of our bandwidth would be.

So we're going to save this to an object called already half.

We're going to do the same thing.  This is one and a half.

So we want to see 1.5 times our bandwidth, so 1.5 times the default bandwidth we had.

And then same, we're going to double the bandwidth that they gave us, bringing it up to like 35 or 36ish.

So we're going to multiply it by two and then we're going to do all of this fun stuff to make a data frame, just to make it easier to view.

And, and you don't have to do it exactly this way.

I think you can just technically run all four of these and then you can compare them instead of doing a bunch of subsetting.

But if you wanted to do it this way too, for a cleaner output, go for it.

I don't remember the requirements, so just check that.

So we're going to go ahead and create save this data frame to our summary table here.

We're going to give it these names and we're going to take the bandwidth and we're going to say, or for the column bandwidth, we're going to have our bandwidth value from our object and we're going to subset the first row from the first column.

And then we're going to do that for all of our bandwidths.

We're going to do the same thing for our coefficients.

Importantly for your coefficients, you're going to want to subset the first one.

There's three different variations, three different coefficients that you could choose from.

This is called the conventional coefficient or the conventional estimate.

And the authors of the package suggest using the conventional for most purposes.

However, we will utilize the robust confidence intervals and p value for our significance testing.

Okay, so subset one from all of these and then we're going to subset three.

These are going to be our robust p values.

So again, this is our more strict P values.

So we're going to do that confidence interval.

This is our lower bound of the confidence interval.

And then we pull our upper bound of the confidence interval and then we're going to go ahead and save all these to the table and let's run this and see our output.

And again, this is the purpose of this is simply just seeing if we check different bandwidths, if we see any significant differences or huge swings in the effect, it could be something that's cause for alarm or maybe we had a fluke in the data.

So this is a way to again.our I's Cross RTS.

So here we have our different bandwidths, we have our original half of our original, we have our 1.5 and then our double and we see our effects are all pretty darn similar.

Our half, when we get really close to the the cutoff, a very narrow bandwidth, we can see that our effect gets bigger.

But we can also look over here and see that our confidence intervals become much wider.

We have less observation, so we were less certain about our effect assessment.

But for these other ones, all pretty darn close.

So that's a great sign.

All statistically significant.

Our 95% confidence intervals are pretty darn similar across the board.

Again, this one here because we have so less observations.

Sorry, this top one here, if I can just highlight only that we have a much wider range because we have less observations, therefore more uncertainty in the estimate.

Long story short, we can be confident in knowing that our treatment effect has got to be pretty darn legit if we can run four different versions of the bandwidth test or four different bandwidths get very similar estimates.

So that would be a bandwidth sensitivity analysis.

Recommend you do that in any kind of future work you do.

And then I recommend you do it in the lab.

Get those bonus questions.

Okay, now Talking about polynomial order 2 again, the another benefit of RD robust is that you can that it can fit a curved line in order if the data is more curved as opposed to linear, or if we suspect that it's not going to be a straight line, we can use a quadratic fit which again is using that p equals 2.

So we can include the argument p equals 2.

It defaults to using p equals 1, defaults to linear.

But we can override that with p equals 2.

Similar with another RD plot is what we'll use later.

You can go both routes.

Long story short, how do you know which one you should use?

You can do both and you can see if there's any big differences like we did with the bandwidth sensitivity test.

So what we've done here is we're doing another model and we're running it linear or this is what we already have.

This is our exact model we already ran.

We're just forcing the P equals one and then we're doing a quadratic term where we do p equals 2 and then we're going to just compare the difference between these two values.

Here we go.  So for our linear we have an effect size of 7.41 and then we have our confidence interval ranging from 4.09 to 10.92.

And in the quadratic option, slightly bigger effect estimate but and we have a slightly higher lower bound with a of a higher upper boundary.

All that to say our treatment effect still falls within about the same range.

So no serious difference between the two.

The rule of thumb here per the authors is generally just stick with the linear model unless you need to for some reason use a quadratic.

That's the rule of thumb.  These are similar.

So if they're similar enough, stick with using linear.

Otherwise feel free to move to quadratic.

But again, just don't overthink it is the the takeaway here.

But run both, see if there's any big differences.

And truthfully, you could get away with with both of these.

If you were to report either one of these, that's fine.

They're both, they're both legit.  They're very close together.

Anywho, moving forward now, we're also going to talk to you about RD plot.

You'll have to use this in your lab.

RD plot is just a really simple way to visualize the data and to visualize that jump.

So let's go ahead and look at it.

RD plots very similar to the RD robust where you have to use indexes and then, and then in our case we're just going to give it a title and we're including a P value.

Importantly, RD robust, the package that are the function we utilize to generate our treatment effect, it defaults to a linear approach.

However, RD plot defaults to fitting the data as best as possible.

And so it defaults to a, a curved.

A curved line.  So because we ran a linear approach for simplicity, we're using the argument P equals 1 to make sure that it's fitting a straight line.

So let's go ahead and run this here Whammy we can see like we mentioned before, RD plot will automatically create distinct slopes on each side of the cutoff.

So this actually looks quite a bit like in terms of the slopes, the earlier visualization we built where we had to include the interaction term in lm.

So these slopes here on each side of the cutoff look pretty darn similar to the ones that RD plot already put in.

Now you might notice something else too.

You might notice that there's a lot less actual observations.

RD plot will automatically bin, sort of like a histogram bins.

It will bin similar observations into a single data point, making it less noisy and allowing us to plot these lines.

So that's why we see less actual observations there, because it does the automatic binning process.

And then just to cover each of these sections here, I have all these in the code through, but I generally just talk to them through you.

So forgive me if sometimes I gloss over some bits of information that are in the text and I don't actually say them out loud because I'm not reading the, the lines themselves.

Just to reinforce this, if you were to run this.

In fact, I'll just do it.

If you were to run this without that P equals 1, you would see here that RD robust automatically defaults to running a fourth order polynomial in order to calculate or to, to plot the lines as best as possible.

And that's what this would look like.

You can see here we have the curvature.

We still demonstrate the same, the same jump.

But I chose to override that for simplicity because we also used the linear approach in our model.

But you can see the difference there where it was able to curve to jump up to reach these.

Whereas this is a, it's forcing that straight line.

And then one last thing I wanted to do for this is take a zoomed in approach.

So this is looking at the cutoff.

Sorry, this is looking at all the data.

So this is the global slopes for each side of the cutoff.

Let's just take a look and see what we're dealing with if we look directly at the cutoff.

So we're going to go ahead and manually save or subset our data.  Save it to zoomed in.

I'm calling it where we're using negative bandwidth or optimal bandwidth and positive.

Our optimal bandwidth.

And then we're going to run the same RD plot and we're going to look just right here at our cutoff.

So running a linear line on each side of our cutoff, we can see these are almost parallel lines just right at the cutoff.

These are pretty, these look pretty parallel.

But if we're looking just at the cutoff, we can see there appears to be a parallel line here just at the cutoff.

Again, but Although we know that that's not true because our RD plot already calculated that for us.

Forgive me on that.

The, I mixed that up in my head with the, the lm with the interaction term, but that was not focusing just at the cutoff.

Ignore what I just said about the, the slopes.

So you can zoom in at the cutoff and you can just get an idea of what that RD plot would do there.

You don't have to do the zoomed in version in your lab, just the typical RD plot.

Okay, while we're making progress, students, we've been at this for a bit.

There is something very, very important I need to explain to you in order to prepare you for your lab.

So hopefully by now everything has made sense.

I wanted to talk about one kind of a weird thing with RD robust, that if I don't explain it to you, it's going to make you misinterpret results in your lab.

So RD robust is, long story short, calculates from the right to the left in order to measure the jump.

So let me explain what that means.

Whereas LM function focuses just on, like, if it's.

Well, you know what, I'm not going to go into that.

That'll make it more confusing.

So long story short, as an example, let's say this setup A here, the treatment above the cutoff, like in our Senate example, that were the data we're working with now, our treatment is on the right side, our control is on the left side.

So the way that RD robust is going to calculate our treatment estimate is by looking at the right side and minusing it by the left side.

So in this case, we have a positive treatment effect.

Recall, our treatment effect is, it's right here, 7.414.

And when we look at the cutoff here, if we're just looking right at the cutoff, we have on the right side a higher value or more positive value than that on the left.

And so if we were to subtract this side from this side, it would be a positive value.

However, and that's why our positive coefficient of 7% makes sense, because we would anticipate that winners, the incumbents would receive more votes in the second election.

That was our hypothesis.

However, in setup B, if our treatment is below the cutoff, which is the example our lab has, our treatment is those who scored less than 60, those in summer school is the treatment, but the right side is the cutoff.

If our treatment is on the left side and our control is on the right side, and we were to say our Control scored higher, or, pardon me, our treatment on the left side did better than our control on the right side.

Then it would actually look like the inverse of this.

Our treatment line would be higher than our control line.

And so if we were to subtract right minus left, we would get a negative value.

And we might think, oh, crap, RD Robust gave me a negative value.

That means that summer school actually had a negative effect on students.

That wouldn't be correct.

And it's simply because of the mechanics of how RD Robust calculates the jump going from right to left, not left to right.

So we have to be very cognizant of what side of the cutoff our treatment is on and what side of the cutoff our control is on in order to properly interpret our estimates.

So let's go through some more examples.

Actually, I'll slow down here.

I'll allow you to pause and review this if you would like to.

I'm just going to explain it to you, but feel free to pause and review.

Okay, so I'm going to go ahead and show you the difference here.

But the underlying mechanics is simply just remember, it calculates right to left.

So a negative may not actually be negative and a positive may not be positive.

Here's the examples I mentioned before.

So let's say in our case, like we have now in our Senate data, we're going through, the treatment is on the right side of the cutoff.

Again, Margin greater than 0 is the treatment side.

Margin less than 0 is the control side.  Winners are on the right.  That's our treatment.

And then our control is on the left.

That's the losers.

So RD Robust is saying, what's the value at the cutoff on the right side of the cutoff?

And then what's the value of the cutoff?

Just on the left side of the cutoff.

And I'm going to take the right side value, subtract it from the left side value.

So let's say this right here is 50.

You can see that here that it's built out.  Excuse me.

So let's say on the blue line here, on the right side of the cutoff, our treatment side is the value of 50.

On the left side of our cutoff at the end here is 46.

RD robust is saying 50 minus 46.

Therefore we have an effect of 4.

Another way you can think about it is going left to right.

If you were to jump up, you would have a positive effect.

But our controls on the left, our treatment is on the right.

Let's flip this and this looks more like what our lab is set up as.

Our summer school treatment is, or our summer school is for anybody scoring less than 60.

So treatments on the left greater than 60 means they're on the control.

There's no summer school.

And so we're saying the treatment is on the left.

And so if we were to go, or, pardon me, RD Robust still calculates right to left.

So we're saying the right side of the cutoff, what's that value?

In this case we're calling it 46.

What's the left side of that cutoff?

That value there is 50.

So RD Robust is setting it up to say 46 minus 50 gives us a negative coefficient of 4.

But visually looking at this, we see, wait, treatment performed better than control.

It's simply the way that RD Robust organizes that model, that calculation.

So one thing you have to be very cognizant of is if the treatment is on the left side.

And again, sorry, let me reiterate this.

Another way to look at it is simply if you're going from left to right, treatment is on the left, go across, it drops.

So that's why you get a negative value.

However, you know that the controls over here is less than the treatment over here.

So it's a positive value.

It's only showing you it's negative because of the right to left calculation.

All this to say being cognizant of this may require you to flip the sign of your estimate, which you'll have to do in your lab because it's going to give you a negative estimate.

You'll have to understand the context of this and then you have to multiply by negative one or simply just remove the negative to understand that it's actually a positive effect, meaning that treatment did better than control.

It's a positive effect.

So again, I'm going to pause here.

You can read through this as much as you want, but that's the general concept.

Oh, and you can easily do this too, if you're ever questioning it or concerned.

And I believe this is a note within the lab itself.

Just, just use RD plot.

If you plot it and you can see which side of the cutoff your treatment is on, and you can see which side of the cutoff your control is on.

You can easily infer visually whether it should be positive or negative.

And just know that that's one of the weird things with RD Robust.

It does a lot of really cool things, but it does that funny.

Okay, hopefully that makes sense.

If you have questions about it, of course, please Let me know.

So now let's go ahead and compare the two.

Let's look at our interaction model version of RD robust and let's look at our RD robust, sorry, our interaction term of the LM function and compare it to our RD robust model.

And I already got it printed here.  I don't know I did that.

So we have the LM function doing an rdd so a centered variable, centered running variable, but using an interaction term.

Our estimate was 6.04 and our RD robust model was 7.41.

Now we also had the other biased naive parallel sloped LM model which was 4 and change.

So what we found is we got more focused on the cutoff and allowing for differing slopes on each side of the cutoff, our treatment effect actually grew nowhere near where our means test was at the beginning, which was in the tune of 22% when we just did an average on each side of the cutoff and compared those.

But a more refined approach leads us to the conclusion that the incumbency advantage is in the tune of 7.41%.

Those who win a close election earn about 7.41% more votes in the following election.

Just for winning.

Now, always the takeaway is to trust RD robust.

This is what it is used for is regression discontinuity design.

And it's the best approach that you should do and it tackles a lot of the internal work like the bandwidth optimization that you don't therefore have to do that to get us to.

Now we're going to go back to that naive RD or sorry naive LM estimate.

When it comes to calculating the counterfactual, understanding how you can build it is very helpful.

But we do have to use the LM function because it's a linear model.

The it gives you easy coefficients that you can use to build the counterfactual.

So all of that to say both here I'm going to in here, excuse me, I'm going to demonstrate how you can build the counterfactual using the LM function coefficients.

And you'll have to do this in your lab as well.

So to get the coefficients we've already established that our that our centered model allows us to interpret the intercept our beta zero as the control at the cutoff, the average of the outcome variable of the control at the cutoff.

And so we want to set up our model to say what is the vote share for a loser at the cutoff.

We previously saved our coefficients if you remember earlier in the code through I mentioned that we saved our Coefficients we'd be using them later.

This is where we use them later.

So this simply represents the coefficients that we used in our naive biased LM model.

And so we have our beta zero, our beta one times zero.

Because this is asking the question what's the predicted vote share for a loser at the cutoff?

A loser was not was in the control group.

So therefore flag that as 0 and then beta 2 being at the cutoff.

So a margin of 0, this is at the cutoff.

So margin is 0.

What is the predicted vote share for a loser?

How do we find that counterfactual?

Simply in this case it is beta zero.

Beta zero is the is already inherently the vote share for the loser at the cutoff.

Now flip that though and let's say we wanted to see the vote share for a winner at the cutoff.

So our margin is zero because again we're at the cutoff.

But treatment flag is turned on because we're looking at somebody who won their election.

So beta two times zero, that is our margin, so zero.

And treatment flag is turned on.

So we're saying beta zero plus beta one.

So what is the impact there?

Let's actually scroll up right now.

I have it all concatenated here.

Go back up to our naive LM model.

Oops, here we go.

So using our naive model, we have our treatment effect being here and then we have our intercept being here.

So what's the predicted value of a winner at the cutoff?

It is our intercept here.

47.331 plus 4.785.

And then if we were to ask the question and and that sum is what is the answer to our question?

So the predicted value of the winner at the cutoff predicted vote share of the winner at the cutoff.  But now let's.

I think the lab asks this question.

So let's talk about how we can use these coefficients in order to calculate the predicted value of of a winner at with a various margin.

Okay, I think you have to do something similar based on the point estimate or the point the math score.

Excuse me, in your lab.

So let's do an example.

Let's say that we wanted to ask you what is the predicted vote share of a winner who won by 5% margin?

How would we calculate that?

Let's come back down and do that.

Oops, overshot.

There we go.

Okay, how would we do that Predicted?

We'll call it ad hoc.

We're doing this on the fly.

So we have our value of beta zero, this is our cutoff and the Loser, the average vote share.

Then we have the winner.

So we turn our treatment flag on and then we have beta 2.

This is our slope.

So the margin times 5.

This here is saying there are 5 units of margin, winner is on and the cutoff.

And then we add that on top of the average of the loser at the cutoff.

Okay, sorry, I had to step away and pause for a moment.  Let's come back to this.

So the predicted value of the vote share for a winner who won by 5%.

We're taking our intercept here, which is the loser at the cutoff.

And then we're saying.

But now we want the winner.

So we add the winner coefficient and then we're saying they won by 5% margin.

So let's roll that out and let's just print ad hoc whammy.

So we're saying the winner, sorry, somebody who won by 5% margin, we would expect them to receive 52% vote share in the following election.

Now let's flip that though and let's say what about somebody who lost.

Eight percent margin?

So let's do the same thing.

Ad Hoc two.

For the loser at the cutoff, we have our beta one, which is our treatment.

And in this case they did not win.

So that is not our treatment.

And then we have our margin put in the wrong value here.

And we want negative 8 because they lost by 8% margin.

So we have our loser at the cutoff.

No, the loser itself.

Sorry, no treatment there with the control loser.

And then negative eight was our margin.

So let's save that and see what their predicted vote share would be.

Excellent.  So we would predict that the loser at the cutoff who lost, sorry, the vote share of a loser that lost by 8% margin in the following election would receive about 43% of the vote.

Okay, so some of that was a little ad hoc.  They were not.

I was not planning on putting that in here, but I believe the lab calls for that now.

So better safe than sorry.

Just to give you an example and in case you need to use the full model and not just something super simple like treatment flag on or off.

Okay.  Oops.

Predictable is not found.

There we go.  My RStudio wasn't wanting to load needed to run these two objects here.

And then I could print all the concatenated information.

So we have what we already noticed.

We have our candidate who barely lost again right at the margin, their predicted next election vote shares 44.9%.

While the candidate who barely won right at the margin predicted next election vote share is 50.95.

Only difference being the effect of the treatment.

To anyone who noticed this, this might have been a coding error Dundancy issue.

Let's see.  Our naive approach was 4.78.  Yep, yep.

Okay.  So that entire time we were utilizing our interaction term.

This is a live example of why you should have different object names are we were using our interaction term effect.

So our naive biased model effect was 4.785 and we saved those coefficients to beta 0, beta 1, beta 2.

However, after we ran the interaction term which was 6.04 we then overwrote beta 0, beta 1, beta two and then we created a new beta three interaction term to where now beta 012 all represent the interaction term models.

And so these values we just came up with down here are not based on our naive model.

So just a heads up, in fact let me rerun this.

Code 3 is going longer than I intended.

I apologize everybody.

Okay, we're going to rerun this.

So our latest beta zero, beta one, beta two is the naive model and we're going to come back down to that section.

Here.

And let's rerun this.

Here we are.  So now using our naive model which was the original intention because the interaction term wouldn't work because beta 2 and our interaction term model only represents the slope of the control, there's some more maneuvering we would have to do in order to use the interaction term model for simplicity sake.

Now we get the actual answer.  So here we go.

The difference is 4.78%.

Which maths are matches.

Excuse me, Our original non interaction term LM model.

We can say that those who are at the cutoff who lost would receive a vote share of approximately 47.3% whereas those who won at the margin zero would be 52.12%.

All this to say this matches up with what our original treatment effect was moving forward because we've gone, we've gone on this for a long time.

I think this is the longest code through we have the local average treatment effect.

This is super important when it comes to inference because we're looking at the cutoff.

All of this to say if we find a treatment effect, it is not reasonable to therefore apply or assume that that treatment effect applies across the board because we're looking at the cutoff at this local randomization.

Our treatment effect still therefore only applies to those at the cutoff.

So this effect, this treatment effect that we found from our RD robust model of seven and change does not apply to those who won by 100%.

Of the vote who had a landslide victory of 75% margin or something like that.

Those.

It would not apply to them or even anything close to those who lost.

But of course, we're only looking at the incumbency advantage, so it wouldn't apply to them, period.

All that to say when you're working with rdd.

Remember, the local average treatment effect is referring to our inference can only be applied to that group right at the cutoff.

Okay, now the final area where I told you we'd get into it is, is how do we check to see if our models or our data is sharp or fuzzy?

That's what we're going to get into now.  So how.

The first question is how do we check to see if our design is actually sharp?

This one's pretty easy.

You can simply plot it.

So for us, we created a treatment flag based on the treatment or based on the margin.

Anybody below zero on the margin lost, anybody above margin won.

And so we simply just plot our treatment flag against our margin and we can see if there's any bleed over for those who lost.

Did any of those who lost somehow end up on the winning side?

Did they receive more than 0% margin?

Anybody who won, did they bleed over on the other side and then have Anything less than 0% margin?

In our case, our data is pretty cut and dry, very sharp.

But this is a way that you can simply check, Plot your, plot your cutoff variable and then you can color each side and you can see if there's any bleed over on each side.

But, but simply check it by plotting it.

In our case, we simply plot it by checking against our treatment flag and then the margin being cut off variable.

In our case, we have a sharp regression discontinuity.

In the case of our lab, it's sharp as well.

So you don't have to worry about that.

I believe there's a note stating that in there explaining why we don't, why don't we check, why don't we, why we don't check that data before we run it in the lab?

And it's because the, the data simulated.

It's, it's, it was sharp to begin with because it was made that way.

Another thing to check is some treatments that are dependent on a cutoff, you know, scoring above or below can be manipulated.

So in the case of, going back to our example of a housing assistance program, people may be incentivized to show or make less money because they want to qualify for a more valuable amount of housing assistance.

People do it with taxes, they try to manipulate their taxes so that they can have a lower tax or marginal tax rate.

And so there's certain things where people can intentionally manipulate their score.

And so a good thing to do is to check that distribution to see if there is any apparent manipulation.

A way you can simply do that is using a histogram and then checking to see if there's any bunching right around the cutoff.

In our case, we're going to do the histogram, we're doing our margin, we are going to isolate it to look closer at the cutoff so we don't have as much space to deal with, and then we're just going to say so right at the cutoff.

Did anybody intentionally manipulate their score?

Did anybody intentionally win in order to have a better chance of winning later?

Obviously in this context it doesn't make any sense.

Everybody wanted to win.

If they could have manipulated their way into winning, they might have.

But we can check and see is there additional bunching below or above the cutoff that might indicate some people were trying to manipulate their score.

This might be a bad ad hoc example, but if we were to be looking at some kind of housing assistance program and if somebody who made above 200% the poverty line received no benefit, but those who made just below 200%, you know, 199% the poverty line, they would receive a significant amount of housing assistance.

If we were to plot that out, we might look and see that, oh wow, there's a lot of people that happen to hit that 199% of the poverty line.

Maybe there's some manipulation of income happening here as a, as a rudimentary example of what you might look like in another context.

There's also RD density is another function that you could utilize for something like this.

For our purposes, a histogram does the trick.

And then when it comes to other threats, to be cognizant of when we're actually working with real world data, questions to ask, are there other policies or impacts that could be happening at the same time?

Like if you recall back in our interrupted time series models, we talked about, well, we had this, this policy go into effect on this day, but was there something else that happened this day?

Was there a snowstorm that might have affected bus ridership at the, the same time too?

Was there some other kind of confounding event that we need to be aware of?

So that's really important to be thinking about too, as well as is the relationship continuous away from the cutoff what that means is that without the.

Without the cutoff itself, it would assume just a continuous line across that there would be no jump.

And then the final verdict.

Just to wrap it all up, we've already discussed this.

We have our naive model and our interaction term model.

So we have our naive model on the side we went from.

When we calculated a single slope and all of the data points, we found that our data had a.

Or, sorry our impact of the treatment.

So impact of winning would increase our votes in the following election to the tune of 4.78%.

And then for every additional point of margin, we found that we would receive an additional 0.35 percentage vote share in the following election and that those who lost at the Cutoff would have 47.33% of the vote share in the following election, right at the cutoff.

Now, when we incorporated an interaction term which allowed for different slopes on each side of the cutoff, still using all of the data, we calculated a treatment effect of 6.04%, once again meaning that those who won would receive an additional 6.04% of the votes in the following election.

We split our slopes on each side.

So our beta 2.

Pardon me, our beta 2 here, vote margin represents the slope on the loser side of the cutoff, saying that for every additional point of margin, a unit of margin, our vote share would increase by 0.22 over time for the loser side.

And then on the right side of the cutoff, our winners had an increase in their slope of 0.17, meaning that they would receive in addition to what the loser's slope was 0.17% more vote share for every additional unit of margin, giving them a total, a sum, total slope of about 0.39.

And then our intercept predicted average vote share for the loser at the cutoff was reduced compared to our naive model by 2 to 44.9%.

And then finally, to wrap it up one last time, we have our RD robust model telling us that we at the cutoff within a bandwidth of 17.754 below and above the cutoffs has an impact, winning has an impact of 7.41% in the following election.

And we're 95% confident that that true estimate would fall somewhere between 4 and 11%.

So that was a lot we went through.

Everybody, I appreciate your time.  Thank you.

Contact me and the discussion board or with messages with any questions.

Happy to help you and good luck in your lab.

I will see you all in the discussion boards.

